---
title: "Chapter 1. Turbulent Times: Maritime Asia and the Hispanic Monarchy in the mid-17th Century"
---

Introduction
============

> Quien quiera saber qué ciudad es Manila, y la altura en que la situo nuestro señor, su calidad y fuerzas, no ha de governarse por grados, elevaciones ni cosmografias, no por sus ganancias, aunque han sido tan grandes, sino por sus pérdidas que son mucho mayores y más continuas.[^1]

[^1]: Diego Aduarte et al., *Historia De La Provincia Del Santo Rosario De Filipinas, Iapón Y China, De La Sagrada Orden De Predicadores* (Gascon, 1693).

> Baltasar de Santa Cruz

Several historians have noted that the evolution of the Spanish Philippines during the seventeenth century mirrors in many ways the experience of the Hispanic Monarchy as a whole. José Eugenio Borao, for example, defines the juncture of the mid-seventeenth century as “the Baroque ending of a Renaissance endeavour.”[^2] The 1640s represented a moment of humiliating defeats, pessimism, imperial disintegration and acknowledgement of decline: the final breaking point of an already jittering structure.[^3] The diminished position of the Hispanic Monarchy in the European inter-polity order after the peace of Westphalia has a close parallel on the political entrenchment of the Spanish Philippines around 1640. Long gone were the dreams and unrealistic ambitions to conquer China and create an Asian empire that would rival the American one. As we will see, the Spanish presence on the Philippines went through extraordinary hardship during the period from 1640 to 1670. But despite a shrinking demography, commercial regression, social instability and devastating natural disasters, the Philippine colony showed remarkable resilience. To my mind, the question lies not so much on whether the Monarchy’s Pacific projection went through a critical stretch in the period under consideration: a general downturn in demographic, economic and political terms, accompanied by social upheavals, seems quite well-established in the historical record (although some authors may have exaggerated the extent of Manila’s decline). The more important issue is rather how the linked settlements centred around Manila adapted to the difficulties and managed to survive them, remaining part of the Hispanic world for another two centuries.

[^2]: José Eugenio Borao and José Eugenio Borao Mateo, *The Spanish Experience in Taiwan, 1626-1642: The Baroque Ending of a Renaissance Endeavor* (Hong Kong University Press, 2010).

[^3]: John H. Elliott, “Self-Perception and Decline in Early Seventeenth-Century Spain,” *Past & Present*, no. 74 (1977): 41–61.

The Hispanic Monarchy stands as perhaps the paradigmatic instance of imperial abatement in the seventeenth century. Traditional historiography of the nineteenth and early twentieth century generally studied the decline of Spain as a *sui generis* case, a unique and momentous event in world history, which was often explained in spiritual, nationalistic terms. However, some of the main historiographical perspectives of the second half of the twentieth century argued forcefully that the problems faced by the Spanish empire were not so dissimilar to the calamities that ravaged other regions and political formations across the European continent.[^4] In the words of Ana Maria Prieto Lucena, “the causes of decadence are too numerous not to read into them the imbrication of more powerful motives, that is, the general economic crisis of the seventeenth century, where (in the Spanish case) political impotence, productive incapacity and social decomposition merge together.”[^5] More recently, the study of the so-called General Crisis of the seventeenth century has moved from an European (including or not overseas possessions) scale to a global one, emphasizing the striking parallels and connections between the Chinese, Ottoman or Southeast Asian situations around 1650, and the European seventeenth century crisis.[^6]

[^4]: Helen Rawlings, *The Debate on the Decline of Spain* (Manchester University Press, 2012).

[^5]: Ana María Prieto Lucena, *Filipinas Durante El Gobierno De Manrique De Lara: 1653-1663*, (Sevilla: Escuela de Estudios Hispanoamericanos, 1984).

[^6]: Michael Marmé, ‘Locating Linkages or Painting Bull’s-Eyes Around Bullet Holes? An East Asian Perspective on the Seventeenth-Century Crisis’, *The American Historical Review*, 113 (2008), 1080–1089 .

In this context, the case of Manila is particularly interesting. The Philippines stood at the crossroads of two of the polities most severely impacted by the seventeenth century crisis: China and the Spanish empire. Moreover, Philippine historiography has been constructed to a considerable extent around two axes: what we may call the Sino-Malay connection, and the Hispanic imperial framework (Hispanic understood in a broad sense, comprising Spain and the Americas, and to a lesser extent the Portuguese empire in Asia). To investigate Manila’s decline is to question the multiple interconnections established among these territories, as well as the relation between the aforementioned historiographical strands. Thus, Manila constitutes an excellent vantage point from which to delve into the interrelated, entangled elements of a global crisis. The importance and impact of these entanglements on the General Crisis (or whether there actually was a general crisis at a global level) is a matter for a further research and scholarly debate, but the existence of intertwined developments connecting both expansive and regressive developments in Asia, America and Europe, and the intrinsic historiographical value of their study, are very clear in my opinion.

The concept of the General Crisis of the seventeenth century is not without critics. Many authors have voiced their scepticism regarding the usefulness of such a broad and over-arching historiographical construct. With an increased emphasis placed on the global reach of the crisis, the relative indefinition of the concept and the difficulties to establish a common periodization for such a wide array of world regions are even more apparent. Despite methodological quandaries and lack of agreement on what “crisis” actually means, the debate around this phenomenon, elusive as it is, remains an active and highly visible field of enquiry. Moreover, the 1640s are still considered a crucial, and to some extent unavoidable, marker of historical chronology, particularly in regards to the histories of China and the Hispanic Monarchy. To quote Jan DeVries, “even historians of Old Europe who dismiss the crisis concept continue to feel its influence, an influence exerted by its very absence. That is, even though historians cannot agree on what it is, there remains a place in the master narrative reserved for it.”[^7] In the following pages, I will review the main parameters and general trajectory of the debate, and then carry out a more detailed examination of the seventeenth-century crisis in the Spanish empire and China.

[^7]: J. De Vries, “The Economic Crisis of the Seventeenth Century after Fifty Years,” *Journal of Interdisciplinary History* 40, no. 2 (2009): 151–94.

Global Crisis
=============

The origin of the seventeenth century crisis debate goes back to Eric Hobsbawm’s article “The General Crisis of the European Economy in the 17th Century,” published in 1954.[^8] Hobsbawm was not the first historian to point to the confluence of political revolts, social upheavals and economic stagnation in the period around 1640.[^9] The seventeenth century had long been portrayed as an epoch of conflict, marked by war and famine. Hobsbawm’s main contribution was to connect all these issues and characterize them as a European-wide phenomenon, not a series of national events. In his view, the social and political instability that characterized the seventeenth century was a surface phenomenon that was caused by the clash between the development of the forces of production and exchange during the sixteenth century, and the rigid and unyielding structure of the feudal social relations. Analyzed from the Marxist, developmental perspective of historical materialism, La Fronde, the English Civil War or the rebellions of Catalonia and Portugal were seen as reactions to a much larger, epochal transition from feudalism to capitalist modernity, spurred by the influence of long-term economic growth on social and political patterns: “The 17th century crisis (…) led to as fundamental a solution to the difficulties which had previously stood in the way of the triumph of capitalism, as that system will permit. (…) In the subsequent period of economic crisis and social upheaval the decisive shift from capitalist enterprise adapted to a generally feudal framework to capitalist enterprise transforming the world in its own pattern took place”[^10]

[^8]: Eric J. Hobsbawm, “The General Crisis of the European Economy in the 17th Century,” *Past and Present*, 1954, 33–53.

[^9]: Roger Bigelow Merriman, *Six Contemporaneous Revolutions* (The Clarendon Press, 1938).

[^10]: Hobsbawm, “The General Crisis of the European Economy in the 17th Century.” 1954. p. 2.

This article launched an extended debate, mostly carried out in the pages of the journal *Past and Present*, concerning the definition, significance and interpretation of the issues raised by Hobsbawm. Although some historians were critical of Hobsbawm’s Marxist and economy-driven approach,[^11] the value of the General Crisis concept for a broader, more inclusive understanding of the historical transformations of the Early Modern Age was quickly recognized, and other authors took up this problematic. Hugh Trevor-Roper, for example, portrayed the mid-seventeenth century as a watershed moment in European history. In his words, “The seventeenth century did not absorb its revolutions. It is not continuous. It is broken in the middle, irreparably broken, and at the end of it, after the revolutions, men can hardly recognize the beginning. Intellectually, politically, morally, we are in a new age, a new climate. It is as if a series of rainstorms has ended in one final thunderstorm which has cleared the air and changed, permanently, the temperature of Europe. From the end of the fifteenth century until the middle of the seventeenth century we have one climate, the climate of the Renaissance; then, in the middle of the seventeenth century, we have the years of change, the years of revolution; and thereafter, for another century and a half, we have another, very different climate, the climate of the Enlightenment.”[^12] Trevor-Roper explained the simultaneous occurrence of revolts and state breakdowns across Europe as the result of the contradiction and conflict of interests between stronger, more assertive monarchical states and the wider society. Compared to Hobsbawm, Trevor-Roper downplays the causal force of capitalist development and concentrates on the rise of the modern absolutist state, and the parasitic weight of the Renaissance bureaucratic court upon a stagnant economy and conflictive social climate. In Trevor-Roper’s analysis, economic factors and the prevalence of military conflict provide the background, but not the impulse of the transformative changes that revolutionized the social and political structure of Early Modern Europe.

[^11]: Theodore K. Rabb, *The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe* (Oxford University Press, 1975).

[^12]: Hugh Trevor-Roper, *The Crisis of the Seventeenth Century* (Liberty Fund, Inc., [1967] 2001).

Focusing more on the plane of ideas and cultural representations, Theodor Rabb depicted the seventeenth century’s upheavals and catastrophes as a political and intellectual crisis of authority that had its roots on a deep-seated sense of insecurity and displacement, as the traditional worldview of medieval Europe was shaken by colonial discoveries, scientific and philosophical controversies and the splintering from the Catholic Church of a number of religious movements.[^13] The rise of a modern, centralized and bureaucratic state further destabilized established patterns of local and regional authority, while the brutality of Thirty Years War exacerbated this sense of loss, confusion and disorientation. On a more methodological vein, Rabb emphasized the need for a clear definition of crisis as a historical category of periodization. One of the main elements in his definition is that the term should be applied only to short term upheavals, even if they were only the culmination of long, drawn-out processes. These periods of turbulence are eventually resolved, and the manner in which they ended, the kind of reconfigurations that they impulse, are as important as the trends that led to the distinct, recognizable span of widespread disorder which properly constitutes the crisis.

[^13]: Rabb, *The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe*. 5-12

The three approaches outlined here show remarkable differences in their points of emphasis and explanatory logics, but they also share a crucial feature: they cast a wide net and try to explain a variety of phenomena, making deliberate use of historical comparison in order to find similarities and common themes across regions. The three authors also tried to explain divergences in the long-term historical trajectories of England, Spain, Germany or France by showing the different path taken by these countries in the resolution of the crisis. According to Niel Steensgard, the value of the crisis debate was to help to overcome historiographical biases and chauvinistic visions of history, breaking from a nationalist framework into a more inclusive, European perspective.[^14] In fact, Steensgard argued that even a European framework was too limited. In an article reappraising the debate on the General Crisis, he explained that “the problem of the seventeenth-century crisis is as much a problem of the space of history as of the time of history. Do the interrelations stop somewhere along a line drawn from the Baltic to the Mediterranean or perhaps the Black Sea, or do they include the whole of Eurasia?”[^15] In his interpretation, the crisis was tied to the development of the state in Eurasia, from the Iberian Peninsula to the Ottoman, Moghul or Chinese empires. This development caused a huge increase in government expenditures, mostly accounted for by the growth in the size of armies, as well as repeated attempts to increase revenue that entailed a “transfer of income from low-income groups to the public sector.”[^16] In short, Steengard sees the crisis as a dislocation in the redistribution channels of agrarian societies caused by the growing fiscal pressure of centralizing empires. The Danish historian also points out that the debate of the seventeenth-century crisis, inconclusive as it is, managed to bring together the analysis of Europe and Asia, taken not as two distinct, unconnected worlds, but as a single, integrated continental *oikoumene*. It is therefore surprising and slightly disappointing that Steengard ignores the growing interconnection of the Americas with both extremes of the Eurasian continent during the period under scrutiny, not just regarding economic and monetary movements, but also ecological and cultural exchanges.

[^14]: Niels Steensgaard, ‘The Seventeenth-Century Crisis and the Unity of Eurasian History’, *Modern Asian Studies*, 24 (1990), 683–697.

[^15]: Ibid. 1990. p. 690.

[^16]: Ibid.

Historians from the French school of the Annales were not as directly involved in the first phase of the debate as their English-speaking counterparts, but Fernand Braudel’s conception of history was hugely influential nonetheless in the shaping of new perspectives about the history of the seventeenth century. The crucial issue for him, as expounded in  *La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen a l'époque de Philippe II*,[^17] was the slow but recognisable shift from the Mediterranean-centred world-economy of the Sixteenth century to the clear economic leadership of the North Atlantic regions by the end of the seventeenth century. The study of *longue-duree*, *presque immobile* historical processes that Braudel pioneered do not seem like a good match with the idea of a relatively short and turbulent period filled with demographic, economic and political catastrophes that have long-lasting, transformative consequences. Braudel thought instead in terms of a gradual reversal of the secular trend of expansion that defined the “long sixteenth century.” However, his emphasis on geographic factors and the influence of climate on social life and the evolution of large political formations had a lasting effect on many historians. As I mentioned before, over the last decade or so the interpretation of the crisis as an epochal transition from feudalism to capitalism (or from Renaissance to Enlightenment) has faded from the discussion, while the hypothesis of a worldwide climate-induced catastrophe has gained traction. The work of Braudel and other geographically-minded historians, such as Emmanuel Le Roi Ladurie[^18], was undoubtedly a factor in the development of global environmental history.

[^17]: Fernand Braudel, *La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen* *à l'époque de Philippe II.* (Editorial Armand Colin, 1949).

[^18]: Roger Chartier and Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, eds., *La Ville Des Temps Modernes: De La Renaissance Aux Révolutions*, Points H249 (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1998).

During the 1980s, the seventeenth-century crisis debate fell silent, as the kind of large-scale, comparative, macro-historical investigations favored by participants on the debate went out of vogue. A new generation of historians reacted against the style and methodology of the Annales School and other types of “scientific” social history, espousing a new kind, or rather several new forms of historical writing. Microhistory, cultural history, postcolonial and poststructuralist perspectives, deconstructionism: all these approaches have theoretical and methodological divergences, as well different epistemological focus, but they coincide in one aspect. They were skeptical of broad, generalizing metanarratives that had so far dominated the discipline of history, going back to 19th century. The effect of the postmodern (or cultural, or linguistic) turn eventually subsided, not without leaving a changed historiographical landscape. The biggest change spurred by the emergence of micro-historical and textual analysis was perhaps an increase awareness of the role of contingency in the course of history, a staunch rejection of Eurocentric teleological narratives, and the need to reframe and re-examine the classic spatial and chronological categories of historical analysis. However, the search for meta-narratives and large-scale historical accounts has not disappeared: if anything, the emergence of world history has renovated and expanded this ambition, though it is grounded on different methodological premises and historiographical concerns than the social scientific history of the 1960s and 1970s.

In the context of this academic climate, a revision of the basic parameters of the General Crisis concept, either to relegate it to the “historiographical dustbin” or to reassert its explanatory power and historical significance, was almost inevitable. The latest major contribution to the General Crisis literature is without a doubt Geoffrey Parker’s *Global Crisis*, published in 2013. This book gathers and summarizes thirty years of research on paleoclimatology and environmental history, arguing that a combination of global cooling (the period known as the Little Ice Age) and natural disasters (an unusual high rate of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and El Niño episodes), characterized the seventeenth century. This put extraordinary pressure on a wide variety of societies, dislocated traditional systems of production, caused famine and subsistence crisis, which in turn led to a period of revolts, banditry, warfare and state collapse like the world had never seen before. Geoffrey Parker does a masterful job of explaining the multiple ways in which human societies suffered from, dealt with and adapted to quick and radical changes in the natural environment. Parker’s study also represents the culmination, and the clearest example, of the mutation of the General Crisis construct over the last decades, addressing head on one of the fundamental concerns of the 21st century: climate change, and its effect at global and local scales for everyone in the planet.

Maritime China and the Rise of the Zheng
========================================

>   However rigorously we attempt to respect the uniqueness of a given historical moment, we can scarcely make ourselves intelligible without using categories developed in other contexts. (...) When we draw analogies, the key question is not whether they are true or false but whether they are revealing.

These words, written by student of Chinese history Michel Marme, point to one of the fundamental issues surrounding the conceptualization of a global crisis in the seventeenth century. As John Dewald pointed out in a recent article, the problem with applying a concept developed within European history to China, and more generally Asia, is that often widely divergent situations are conflated under one encompassing rubric. What is at stake here is the underlying interpretation of connections and linkages in the early modern world. Were the disasters and political turmoil of Europe and China part of the same process, and thus deeply entangled, or did they follow parallel but ultimately autonomous paths? Geoffrey Parker would answer that a period of extreme climatic conditions was the common underlying factor behind economic depression, social unrest and political breakdown. Jack Goldstone argued that population increase without deep technological and social transformations will eventually reach its tragic, Malthusian limit, thus explaining the parallels between Ming China, the Ottoman Empire, and England. Atwell, on the other hand, focused on bullion flows, asserting that the sudden depression of the Manila galleon and Japanese silver exports to China exacerbated the already difficult position of the late Ming economy, contributing to the downfall of the Ming dynasty.

Indeed, it is the specific timing of the Ming-Qing dynastic transition that provides the strongest impetus for a global conception of the seventeenth-century crisis. However, we do not need to decide which one of the three explanations outlined above is the most accurate one, or to give a definitive answer to the question of whether global linkages can explain the simultaneous onset of crisis in Europe and East Asia. Perhaps a more limited and cautious conception of the General Crisis, one that looks for regional, interconnected disturbances rather than conclusive causal explanations of huge historical processes, can also serve to advance our understanding of a variety of places in the world, among them Manila and the Spanish Philippines.

From this perspective, the turbulence caused by the long period of civil war in China certainly played a crucial factor in the evolution of Manila during the second half of the seventeenth century. The Ming dynasty was facing mounting difficulties to maintain order and control in the vast spaces encompassed by the Chinese empire. With more than a hundred million inhabitants around 1600, China was by far the largest and most populated polity in the early modern world. As the administrative and military apparatus of the dynasty was thrown in disarray by widespread famine, banditry and declining fiscal revenue, both the northern and southern frontiers of the empire were gaining autonomy. The foundation of the Manchu state by Nurhaci and the consolidation of a vast profit-and-power maritime organisation in Fujian by Zheng Zhilong were parallel developments that show the slow decay of Ming rule over the empire. In 1644, the rebel leader Li Zicheng took Beijing, only to be defeated by the Manchu armies a few months later. This year marked the beginning of what the historian Fredric Wakeman called “the Great Enterprise”: the violent imposition and gradual reconstruction of imperial order at the hands of the newly formed Qing dynasty. One of the opponents to the Manchu conquest of Ming China was precisely the Zheng organisation, which had taken control of a substantial share of maritime trade in the South China Seas.

This conflict lasted from 1645 when the Manchu leadership lured Zheng Zhilong to Beijing with promises of official status in the new order (he was executed soon after), until 1683, when the Zheng rule over Taiwan was crushed by the Qing. This civil war caused an astonishing amount of destruction, and its effects were felt all around the South China Seas. Indeed, the Ming-Qing transition was coterminous with a series of deep and complex changes in the Sino-Pacific maritime world. In the words of Patrizia Carioti: “In addressing the study of the East Asian world of the seventeenth, it is extremely arduous to break down and analyse the singular elements that comprise it, without losing sight of the overall picture, in its general guidelines, in its essential traits.”[^19] The General Crisis debate has focused mostly on the collapse of big states and the depression of central economic regions, but the relation between these cases and the evolution of liminal, maritime spaces that formed inter-imperial “contact zones”, bears further consideration. Perhaps it is possible to understand the cycle of instability and regression in the political structure and economic foundation of the Ottoman, Chinese or Habsburg empires as autonomous processes that can be studied in relative isolation. However, the consequences of the crisis for the entangled frontiers between these empires, such as the Southeast Asian Mediterranean in which Manila was embedded, confront us with a multiplicity of connections, a number of intersecting planes that can only be grasped by carrying out the investigation across different scales that go beyond any singular historiographical tradition.

[^19]: P. Carioti, ‘IL MERCANTILISMO CINESE IN GIAPPONE TRA I SECOLI XVI-XVII: Parte I’, *Il Giappone*, 28 (1988), 73. “Nell’affrontare lo studio del mondo estremo-orientale del Seicento, è estremamente arduo scindere ed analizzare i singoli elementi che lo compongono, senza perdere di vista il quadro complessivo, nelle sue direttive generali, nei suoi tratti essenziali.”

Iberian Empires after 1640
==========================

The literature about the decline of the Spanish empire is so vast and complex that a full review of the main perspectives lies beyond the scope of this chapter. The overwhelming expanse of the historiography to some extent reflects the striking size and diversity of the Hispanic Monarchy at the beginning of the seventeenth century. Many historians have characterised the Monarchy as the first global empire of the Early Modern Age, particularly during the Iberian Union. In the words of Serge Gruzinski, “fruit de l’union de de l’Empire espagnol et de l’Empire portugais, cette monarchie rassemble alors des territories, des routes d’echange et des aires d’influence disperses entre plusieurs continents, Europe, Afrique, Amerique et Asie.” Rather than trying to cover the whole horizon of the Hispanic Monarchy in this brief text, I will succinctly describe some of the main reasons that historians have used to explain Spanish decline, and then argue that there is much to be gained in considering the relation between the well-studied rise and fall of the Atlantic Spanish empire, and the presence of the Portuguese and Castilian crowns in Southeast Asia and the Pacific, before and after the breakup of the Union of Crowns.

An interesting paradox of the seventeenth-century conjuncture of the Hispanic Monarchy lies in the divergent paths taken by the American and European sides of the empire. The Spanish Habsburg dynasty lost important parts of its possessions in Europe (most notably the Netherlands and Portugal, formally recognised as independent polities in 1648 and 1668, respectively). Even more crucially, the constant state of war from 1567 to 1668 exhausted Monarchy’s military capabilities and fiscal resources, eroding and finally erasing Spanish hegemony and Habsburg aspirations to universal dominion and Catholic restoration. The worsening conditions in the European theatre of war and the fiscal exhaustion of Castile during the 1620s and 1630s led to the project of the Union of Arms, devised by the Count-Duke of Olivares, *valido* of the king Philip IV. Olivares tried to reorganise and reallocate the burden of empire across the different kingdoms of the Monarchy, thus alleviating the pressure on the Castilian kingdom. The attempt was largely unsuccessful, provoking a reaction from kingdoms like Aragon and Portugal, who saw the Union of Arms as a threatening and unlawful transformation of the constitution of the Hispanic composite monarchy, and resulting in the Catalan revolt of 1640 and the Braganza restoration.

In this context, it is important to note that the Hispanic Monarchy was not a centralised, absolutist state, but a wide collection of different kingdoms held together by their allegiance to the same king, but maintaining their own customs, laws and rights. In short, this imperial framework can best be described as a composite monarchy, which, according to John Elliott, was the dominant political form in Early Modern Europe. Although Castile was the foremost kingdom in the Habsburg empire, it was not its only centre. The Monarchy is better conceptualised as a multi-polar political edifice, not an absolutist empire defined by the opposition of a metropolitan core and colonial peripheries. Lateral, horizontal dynamics among the “four parts of the world” in which the Monarchy was present were as important and decisive as the vertical, hierarchical relations between the royal court and the different regions of the empire.

The sorry state of the Castilian economy around 1650 provides a stark contrast with the development of New Spain as centre of its own, an emerging pole in an expansive world economy. This dual process was analyzed by Ruggiero Romano in his book *Coyunturas opuestas*. Castile had been the leading region of the Habsburg imperial enterprise since at least the reign of Philip II, if not the Comunero revolt (1518). The Castilian economy, which already showed signs of stagnation during the last years of the sixteenth century, went into full depression during the first half of the seventeenth century, as evidenced by demographic regression, declining agrarian production and a diminished position in international trade. There is no clear agreement among historians in regards to the specific effect of mounting fiscal pressure and monetary turmoil on the agrarian economy of Castile, but most authors acknowledge the negative consequences of imperial warfare for the urban network and commercial development of the Castilian kingdom.

Meanwhile, Mexico, and to a lesser extent Peru, achieved a degree of consolidation after the demographic shocks that followed the conquest of the Aztec and Inca empires. Various studies about the history of seventeenth-century New Spain have revised Borah’s thesis regarding this period as a century of depression for the Mexican economy. According to Ruggiero Romano and John Lynch, the Spanish Americas escaped the worse effects of the seventeenth-century crisis. These authors emphasised instead processes of internal reconfigurations and increasing autonomy from Spain. Agrarian development and the rise of a commercial, urban network in the Americas meant that a higher proportion of silver stayed in Mexico rather than being exported either to the Philippines or Europe.

The comparison and mutual influence between the American and European sides of the empire immediately raises the problem of how they were connected, and what factors determined the evolution of transatlantic trade during the seventeenth century. The progressive loss of control of the Monarchy over the *Carrera de Indias* has long been considered one of the main factors in the eclipse of the Spanish empire. Dutch, English and French piracy disrupted the functioning of the route, increasing protection costs and thus provoking a vertiginous expansion of smuggling and illicit trade. Even more important than this, the inability of the Castilian economy to cover the demand for manufactures in America led to a progressive capture of the transatlantic route by northern European merchants, and a subsequent diversion of silver from the Spanish imperial system. This process had already started relatively early in the sixteenth century, but it accelerated during the first decades of the seventeenth century. According to Antonio Garcia-Baquero, the Spanish monopoly became a fiction, as most of the capital that sustained the *Carrera de Indias* was tied to foreign merchants, who used commercial agents in Seville and Mexico to profit from this route, while the Monarchy had to keep funding the rising protection costs.

Ruggiero Romano’s thesis is important for our purposes because it highlights the diversity of situations faced by the disparate regions that composed the Hispanic Monarchy. From the perspective of a polycentric, composite state, it is almost impossible (and not particularly rewarding) to find a clear, linear thread of ascendance and decline that can accurately sketch the trajectory of such a diverse and scattered empire. In other words, the depression of the Castilian economy and the loss of political power of the Habsburg dynasty in Europe, while obviously impactful, do not by any means determine the full scope of processes and connections that took place under the overarching framework of the Hispanic Monarchy. We need to pay closer attention to the local and regional situation of the different parts of the empire, focusing not just on the inner articulation of the imperial system, but on the relation between a particular zone and its immediate surroundings. In the case of the Philippines, this entails a careful consideration of the events and trends that characterise the history of Southeast Asia, China and Japan during the seventeenth century.

Collapse or Continuity? Reassessing Manila’s Mid-Century Crisis
===============================================================

The Political Retrenchment of the Spanish Philippines
-----------------------------------------------------

In September of 1642, the Spanish fort Santiago, in northern Taiwan, surrendered to the VOC. Beset by a lack of manpower, supplies and ships, the Spanish garrison could not withstand the Dutch assault for long. Established in 1626, the fortress of Jilong was not a key point in the Monarchy’s string of military bases around the Philippine archipelago. It was founded in order to counteract the growing Dutch colony of Taoyuan and protect the *sampan* trade to Manila, but the Philippine governors could never muster enough resources to carry out these objectives. Moreover, the fort of Santiago demanded a financial commitment that the hard-pressed treasury of the Philippines could ill afford at a moment of strong military pressure by the VOC, combined with the ever-present danger posed by Chinese, Japanese and Mindanao pirates. In 1637, as a large expedition to the Muslim sultanates of the Southern Philippines was being prepared, the Spanish governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera decided to scale back the Jilong outpost, anticipating its complete evacuation in the coming years. In the meantime, Corcuera believed that even a reduced garrison could withstand Dutch attacks. In 1641, the governor was proven right, and the fortress was able to survive a first VOC assault. The next year, however, the fortress did not hold, and the stable Spanish presence in Taiwan was discontinued, never to return.

The fortress itself may not have been important in the great scheme of things, but this humiliating defeat, and particularly the way it occurred, had important repercussions. The Jilong fiasco showed the precarious position of the Monarchy’s power in the South China Sea and caused an embarrassing loss of reputation for the Crown. When a new governor, Diego Fajardo Chacon, arrived to the Philippines in 1643, Corcuera was subjected to a long and meticulous trial (*residencia*), a good part of which was dedicated to the defeat in Taiwan. Corcuera was charged with numerous wrongdoings, found guilty and imprisoned for more than five years. The Crown later absolved him, and Corcuera went on to have an illustrious career at the service of the king. His tenure in the Philippines, however, was marred with scandals and inner conflict within Manila’s ruling elite. The situation in 1645 was certainly critical. The *visita* of royal inspector Pedro de Quiroga had severely disrupted the galleon trade from 1635 to 1638, and then the breakup of the Iberian Union in 1640 (though news did not reach Manila and Macao until 1642) further isolated the Spanish Philippines and eliminated the profitable Macau-Manila route. The Dutch continued to solidify their gains and harass the Iberian settlements: Malacca fell in 1640, and the VOC supplanted the Portuguese in Nagasaki, taking a hold of the trade between China and Japan. Meanwhile, internal factionalism, social unrest and fiscal penury haunted the Philippine colony during the 1640s, and the Sangley revolt of 1639, combined with the devastating earthquake of 1645, did much to ruin Manila’s economic foundation, and thus greatly hindering Spanish capacity for reaction.

The period between 1646 and 1648 marked the strongest push by the VOC to strangle the commercial network that sustained the Spanish colony. In these years, three successive armadas established a blockade of Manila Bay and waited in the Strait of Embocadero in order to catch the galleons arriving from Acapulco. The conquest of Jilong, as well as a strengthened Taiwan colony, allowed the Dutch to exert more pressure on the Philippine archipelago and finally close a chokehold on Manila’s main lifeline: the trans-Pacific route to New Spain. Despite numerous difficulties and military setbacks, the fleets commanded by (**look up the name**) were largely successful in their objective of severing communications between Manila and Acapulco. From 1646 to 1649, no Spanish galleons crossed the Pacific Ocean. Only in 1652, with the arrival of the galleon San Francisco Javier to Cavite, normal relations were re-established, but the effect of this lengthy disruption on trade, fiscal relief and administrative and military supply would be felt for many years to come. Before I explore in more detail the ramifying effects of the war effort against the VOC, I will briefly sketch the main lines of the VOC strategy and its evolution during the first half of the seventeenth century in order to situate and contextualise the critical juncture of the 1640s.

Already before the creation of the VOC in 1602, different Dutch companies were actively involved in trade with Southeast Asia. From Cornelius Houtman first voyage in 1595 to 1602, no less than 39 ships completed the round-trip from the United Provinces to the Spice Islands. One of these expeditions, led by Oliver Van Noort, had the first military encounter with the Spanish armada. The naval battle took place on Manila Bay and resulted in a narrow victory for the Spanish fleet, commanded by the president of the *Audiencia* (court of appeals) and celebrated historian Antonio de Morga. Despite what this early clash might suggest, the use of the newly created VOC as a military arm in what was to become a global struggle against the Hispanic Monarchy (which comprised the colonial empires of both Portugal and Castile) did not arise as a fully formed, deliberate policy from the outset. According to Ernst Van Veen, this direction was resisted by sectors of the Amsterdam merchant community who had invested in the company. When many of these merchants retired from the endeavour, considering it a very risky proposition, the VOC leadership fell into hands of a more aggressive faction that supported an open war with the Hispanic Monarchy in Asian waters.

It is beyond the scope of this chapter to examine the comprehensive literature about the early years of the VOC, but it will be enough to point to the fact that this aggressive strategy failed to bear the fruits for an extended period of time. It has been often assumed that the Dutch East India Company represented from the outset a model for the modern, efficient and capitalist trade organisation that would easily supplant the archaic and corrupt structure of the Iberian Empires. However, the picture that arises from the first forty years of Dutch presence in maritime Asia hardly supports this view. One could argue that the Spanish Philippines fared comparatively better than the *Estado da India* in the global war against the Dutch, fighting the VOC to a stalemate until the 1640s, with great costs for both sides.

(European wars were a minor part of the changes in the Sino-Pacific maritime space = The Dutch relied on Zheng Zhilong in their attempt to dominate the East Asian corridor.)

Myth and reality of Manila’s mid-seventeenth century trade depression
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Among the many perspectives and approaches that comprise the “world history galaxy,” global monetary history has become one of the most active fields of debate and research. Historians like TePaske, Atwell, Spooner or Richard von Glahn have tried to trace the movement of species (mainly gold, silver and copper, but also cowries) from one extreme of the world to the other during the early modern period. In this story, China occupies a central role. Countless contemporary observers, as well as modern historians, noted with amazement the power of attraction of the Chinese economy, and its unending thirst for silver. Described as a “the sucking pump of the international economy,” China received a considerable share of the world silver production from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. These flows are notably difficult to follow and quantify, but even the lower end estimates constitute a huge amount of white metal. According to Joseph Needham, 300 million taels of silver moved from the centres of production (mainly Japan and the Americas) to their final destination in China, which later on the 18th century came to be known as the “tomb of European monies.” Through multifarious circuits, silver travelled from merchant to merchant, city to city and empire to empire, stimulating commercial interaction, impacting global price movements and spurring a bewildering array of consequences that historians are still trying to make sense of.

As underlined by Atwell, there were three main channels through which silver arrived to China: the intra-Asian country trade, linked with the Cape route; the Nagasaki-Macau connection; and the transpacific trade between Acapulco and Manila. In this chapter I will only restrict myself with the latter route: the *nao de China* linking New Spain with the Philippines. However, I will also make an occasional remark to the Japanese route when the contextualization of Manila’s trade calls for it. The study of the transpacific silk-for-silver exchange has progressed noticeably since Pierre Chaunu published his seminal book *Les Philippines et les Pacifiques des Iberiques* in 1960. Subsequent findings tended to support Chaunu’s broad sketch of the Manila Galleon’s evolution. He argued that after a rapid increase in volume from 1570 to 1610, Galleon trade levelled off and declined slightly up to 1635-40. During the 1640s, the silk-for-silver exchange through Manila plunged into an extended depression, reaching its lowest point around 1660. From then onwards, commerce picked up in Manila to some extent, but a new take-off of transpacific trade would only come during the 18th century. Even then, the average value of trade during the best decades was well under its peak in 1610-15 when we adjust for inflation. Chaunu made a strong case for an understanding of the Manila Galleon route as following the same rhythms and patterns of fluctuation of the Atlantic *Carrera de Indias*. In fact, from his perspective the Pacific route was but an extension of the Atlantic one, and therefore they were both subject to the same long-term conjuncture.

Dennis O’Flynn and Arturo Giráldez introduced in the debate a visible and influential voice rejecting this periodization. According to them, there was no mid-seventeenth century depression in trade, but rather a stable yearly exchange valued at about two million pesos all throughout the seventeenth century, before rising even further during the eighteenth century. For the purposes of this chapter, it is useful to carry out a more detailed comparison of the claims, arguments and evidence supporting the Flynn and Giráldez thesis with the more established interpretation of Pierre Chaunu and his followers.

The basic premise of Flynn and Giráldez position is easy enough to define: from their perspective, the problem with Chaunu’s analysis of the Galleon route is that he relied on *almojarifazgo* data (custom records) that systematically misrepresent the actual volume of trade due to rampant smuggling:

>   Although admirable in many respects, his work suffers from a methodological flaw. Chaunu's export/import estimates are based on *almojarifazgo* tax receipts registered in House of Trade records in Seville. Chaunu (1951, 460-61; 1960, 250) explains that a rise in the almojarifazgo tax rate from 3 percent to 6 percent between 1612 and 1640 accompanied a 90 percent drop in silk exports via Manila, roughly following Braudel's economic phases in Europe. He dismissed counterarguments which suggested that increased smuggling could have compensated for such a dramatic decline in official trade. Smuggling could not have been so pervasive, he alleged, because collateral evidence also shows that New World silver production, therefore, exports fell off dramatically by the 1630s (Chaunu 1951, 461). Chinese silk exports via Manila could only be maintained if silver imports from Acapulco were sustained simultaneously. If westbound silver fell off dramatically in the Pacific, then eastbound silk must have subsided too.

Flynn and Giráldez then go on to argue that new evidence has debunked the notion that American silver production fell off dramatically in 1630s, referring to the work of Richard Cross and Michel Morineau. In fact, they claim, the Galleon route may have increased in importance during the second half of the seventeenth century, on account of the plummeting levels of production of Japanese silver mines in the same time-span. Chinese merchants turned to the Manila market to compensate for the decline of the Japanese trade. Flynn and Giráldez support the research of Chuan, who rejects the hypothesis of a secular depression of the transpacific route and values the silk-silver exchange at a yearly 2 million pesos. Flynn and Giráldez also use more impressionistic and qualitative kind of evidence, gleaned from official letters, narrative accounts and controversies between Mexico’s merchant consulate and the Sevillian Atlantic lobby regarding the deleterious effect of silver flight to China for the Spanish economy. Their main point is that, while illicit trade was a reality from the beginning of the Manila Galleon, it increased dramatically as the seventeenth century went along, thus explaining the discrepancy between official tax accounts and the actual value of the silk-for-silver exchange. The attempt of the royal authorities to curtail trade between China and the Americas (exemplified by the laws forbidding traffic between Mexico and Peru enacted in 1631 and 1634, and the 1635-1639 disruption caused by the *visita* of tax inspector Pedro de Quiroga) only served to make smuggling a more attractive proposition, reducing legal trade to insignificance.

Flynn and Giráldez also point out that New Spain continued to be a major consumption centre for Chinese silk and other Asian products. In 1700, Mexico City’s *Parian* was built, a huge marketplace dedicated to the sale of Asian products. If the silk-for-silver exchange had faded to negligible levels compared to the early seventeenth century, why do not we have evidence for a similar depression in the consumption of silk and other Asian commodities in late seventeenth century Mexico? Another argument for the “no depression” thesis is that Manila’s main foundation and even sole reason for being was the intermediary role it played between the Chinese and American economies. However, according to Flynn and Giráldez, Manila did not suffer crippling decay as a result of the supposed crisis of trade. In fact, “the city of Manila thrived in the second half of the seventeenth century. Manila's only function was as entrepot for the silk-silver trade.” To substantiate this claim, they mention Gemelli Careri’s description of Manila in his *Giro del Mondo*, maintaining that Careri’s portrayal does not correspond with a moribund city, starved of its dominant source of trade.

As we saw in the previous chapter, Flynn and Giráldez made a valuable contribution to world history by reassessing the importance of the Manila Galleon in global bullion flows and the birth of globalisation. However, their understanding of the concrete circumstances and mechanisms that underpinned Manila’s rise as a hub of global exchange is less than adequate. A major flaw in their critical review of Pierre Chaunu’s work is that the French historian’s account did not depend exclusively on *almojarifazgo* figures. He also showed a steep reduction in the arrival of ships to Manila from 1640 to 1680, as well as a much reduced income in the royal treasury derived from the licenses of residence given to Chinese merchant and workers. Chaunu also emphasised that the total number of Chinese residents in the city fell off noticeably, from around 20,000 thousand in 1639 to less than 5,000 in the 1680s. Exact demographic figures are hard to come by, but my research supports Chaunu’s claim that the Chinese community of Manila went through an extended and considerable slump in the late seventeenth century. We have evidence of a decrease not just of taxes on residential licenses. The rent that Chinese shop-owners of Manila’s *Parian* paid to the *Cabildo* (the municipal government) declined substantially during the 1640s, never fully recovering for the remainder of the century. Furthermore, income from the *baratos de sangleyes* (a tax on gambling houses collected annually during the Chinese New Year celebrations) fell so much that the legally allowed period for gambling was prolonged from five days to fifteen days. An overwhelming amount of circumstantial evidence also supports this interpretation: time and time again, royal officials and members of the clergy remarked that the Chinese population had plummeted from its peak during the first decades of the seventeenth century.

Another flaw of Flynn and Giráldez’s approach is their sometimes careless and biased use of historical evidence. Their reference to Gemelli Careri’s travel book is a clear example. Flynn and Giráldez do not consult the original source. Instead, they rely on Zaide’s very selective translation of the document. This kind of second-hand quotations are not necessarily a problem, but when they misrepresent the import of the source they become very troubling. Gemelli Careri did write that “the author of nature placed Manila so equally between the wealthy kingdoms of the East and of the West that it may be accounted one of the greatest places of trade in the world.” But here, Careri is referring to the natural features of the port of trade: its position at the crossroads of different trade routes, and the extraordinary quality of its bay for ocean sailing ships. Careri’s full description of Manila is much more balanced, and in my opinion, would rather constitute evidence for Chaunu’s thesis. Flynn and Giraldez rely heavily on circumstantial remarks and qualitative evidence to shore up their case, but fact and fancy in the Manila Galleon, accuracy and exaggeration in its historical record, are notably difficult to disentangle, so we need to consider very carefully the origin and intention of every statement that is used as proof of particular development.

In short, Flynn and Giráldez’s argument seems to me unconvincing. Maybe the downward trend of *almojarifazgo* records could be explained away by the increase of smuggling (although even this point seems shaky and uncertain), but the simultaneous reduction in naval traffic, demographic indicators and overall taxation on the *Sangley* community cannot be accounted for in Flynn and Giráldez’s framework. Apart from their incorrect allusion to Gemelli Careri, Flynn and Giráldez offer no substantial evidence for their claim that Manila thrived during the second half of the seventeenth century. In my opinion, their strongest argument is the absence of evidence supporting a catastrophic reduction of silk consumption in New Spain, but this is nothing more than an intriguing hypothesis that deserves further consideration, not a well-established fact.

Does this mean that Chaunu hit the nail on the head? Perhaps in his broad outline. However, there are important questions that remained unresolved, particularly these two: what are the reasons for Manila’s diminution in trade? A closer look at Manila’s evolution may afford us some clues in order to provide a more nuanced explanation of the origin and development of Manila’s mid-seventeenth century crisis.

Pierre Chaunu squarely placed the original causes of the crisis on two main factors: the sharp diminution of silver production in the Americas around 1630, and the progressive encroachment upon the Spanish imperial system by the Dutch VOC. In his recent thesis, Jose Luis Gasch studied the investment strategies of Mexican merchants involved in the transpacific trade and concluded that Dutch harassment of Spanish navigation in Southeast Asia caused a considerable upsurge of risk and uncertainty on the expected returns of each commercial trip. This convinced the Mexican traders to adjust and diversify their involvement in the Manila Galleon by using a higher number of commercial agents and reducing their overall stake. That is, instead of relying on just one proxy in Manila, they employed several, as well as diminishing their total investment by as much as 50%. An interesting corollary to this insight is that the problems of the Manila Galleon were related to the erratic fluctuations of trade, caused by uncertain conditions of navigation.

In this context, Dutch piracy was only one factor, although certainly crucial. According to Geoffrey Parker and Greg Bankoff, from 1630 to 1660, the usual wind patterns in the Pacific were thrown into disarray by the repeated occurrence of El Niño episodes. This would help to explain the high rate of shipwrecks in the transpacific route during this period. From this perspective, the mid-seventeenth century depression of trade in Manila can be understood, not as a sudden eclipse provoked by Dutch encroachment, but as a progressive intensification of political and environmental turbulence that diminished the number of successful commercial voyages. In other words, the galleons that completed the round trip from Manila to Acapulco carried more or less the same amount of silver and merchandise as before, but a higher rate of galleon journeys ended in shipwreck. For example, the galleon San Francisco Javier shipwrecked close to Embocadero after crossing the Pacific, but divers were able to salvage most of the cargo, composed by silver remittances. The estimated value of the rescued silver was close to a million and a half pesos. By considering the effect of natural disturbances, we can explain why the trade depression continued in the 1650s and 1660s after the Peace of Westphalia ended the period of strong Dutch pressure on the trans-Pacific and Southeast Asian routes that connected Manila with the wider world.

Gasch’s line of enquiry complements the thesis of Chaunu while adding an institutional dimension that encompasses the main actors and processes present in the Atlantic and Pacific trade routes, with the Crown acting as an arbiter in the negotiated construction of the empire. His interpretation of the 1635 fiscal inspection of Pedro de Quiroga on the Manila Galleon trade is particularly useful. However, like Chanu’s *Les Philippines et le Pacifique des Iberiques*, it suffers from a relative lack of attention to the political and economic situation in China and Southeast Asia from 1620 to 1680. According to Gasch, “both the trans-Pacific and trans-Atlantic trade areas followed similar dynamics during the first half of the seventeenth century as they were part of a single process that had its roots in the Atlantic world and Europe.” George Bryan da Souza and William Atwell provide an alternative reading of this phenomenon. They argue that, while the initial disruption of trade may have been caused by diminished silver production in the Americas, institutional conflicts exemplified by Pedro de Quiroga’s *visita*, and the effects of the war against the Dutch, the continuing low economic performance of the Manila Galleon throughout the next decades was likely caused by the upheavals in Southern China following the Qing conquest. Trade in Manila picked up considerably in the 1680s, after the Qing assault in Taiwan crushed the last bastion of Ming loyalists, and the Kangxi emperor decided to relax the draconian policies that had devastated the economy of coastal China.

To conclude, a more balanced consideration of the events in the Hispanic Monarchy and the East Asian maritime corridor, as well as the integration of environmental factors in the analysis, can help to overcome monocausal explanations of Manila’s decline that put too much emphasis on European warfare in Asian waters, given that both the VOC and the Spanish Philippines depended critically on trade mechanisms and agents of local origin, and were thus embedded in regional networks of commerce and power that are of paramount importance to a more complete description of this period.
