---
title: "Chapter 2. Conflictive Interdependence: Chinese Intermediaries and the Governance of Manila"
---

[TOC] 

 

Introduction
============

The somewhat unusual relation established between the Governor Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera and a Chinese leader named Manuel Chunquian constitutes an interesting albeit unexplored example of the role of political and economic mediators in the establishment of the Hispanic Monarchy in the Philippines.[^1] Contemporary observers identified this relationship as a key factor in the lead-up to the 1639 Chinese rebellion, contending that the fiscal exploitation of *Sangley* workers, intensified by Hurtado de Corcuera with the help Manuel Chunquian, was the main cause of the revolt. According to Sebastián Hurtado’s *juicio de residencia*, Chunquian was a close associate of the Governor, acting as a go-between (or *medianero*, as the Spanish sources put it) in his dealings with the Chinese communities of Manila.[^2] Manuel Chunquian was not only a political mediator, he was also a business agent of the Governor, developing commercial partnerships with men close to Sebastián Hurtado, such as Agustín de Hegoen, Sebastián Delgado and Juan de Vallecilla.[^3] Although some of Chunquian’s business endeavours involved external trade, the most profitable activities were based on the extortion fees and bribes from Chinese merchants (through the control of the inspection of ships) and heads of artisanal guilds (by managing the allocation of construction and provision contracts). Furthermore, Chunquian was put in charge of gambling operations, a crucial but overlooked aspect of Manila’s urban economy that also involved a high degree of coercion, as I will show.

[^1]: Explain the character of this source. AGI Filipinas 22, R.1, N.1, “Cargos que resultan contra Manuel Chunquian, chino infiel,” f.120r-131v.

[^2]: Why I could not make more intense use of this source. I relied on Juan Gil’s abundant transcriptions and summaries of the document, while double-checking when possible with the original. AGI Escribania 409D, “Quaderno 12,” f.

[^3]: AGI Filipinas 22, R.1, N.1,

The study of this episode throws new light on the characteristics of the social compact established between Spanish officials and Chinese elites, and challenges previous understandings . Documents produced in the context of other social upheavals (in 1603, 1662 and 1684) inform us that there was a certain degree of animosity between the established Chinese traders of Manila, and the much bigger group of urban and agrarian labourers settled around Intramuros. These revolts can be better interpreted as the result of resentment and opposition, not only towards the Spanish administration, but also towards rich and influential *Sangleys* like Manuel Chunquian, who collaborated with Spanish officials in the extraction of money and labour from the general Chinese population. In other words, the ethnic dimension of the conflict may have been exaggerated by later Spanish accounts, which justified the brutality of the massacre and its indiscriminate nature (often not distinguishing between law-abiding Chinese citizens and the insurrectionists) by representing an overarching conspiracy that included the whole of the *Sangley* community.

Historians have long recognised the crucial role played by Chinese merchant communities in the commercial world of Southeast Asia, an influence that carries through to the present. As Geoffrey Gunn notes, “there are large or even dominant Chinese communities in all the South-east Asian nations today, legacies of historical trading contacts and immigration under European colonialism.” As one of the dominant poles of the world economy, and the most administratively advanced and densely populated state in Eurasia during the second millennium of the Common Era, China exerted an important pull on global trading circuits since at least the 9th century. Although traditional interpretations often characterised China as a continental, inward-looking empire, its connections with the maritime world of Southeast Asia, and beyond with India, East Africa and the Middle East, are by now well-established. The overwhelming size and strength of the Chinese empire marked the geopolitical configuration of East Asia, articulated through a diplomatic system of tributary relations, which doubled as channels of economic exchange.

This reassessment of China’s maritime orientation has been complemented by a shift in perspective that emphasises the fact that, when Europeans arrived in India and Southeast Asia, they encountered long-established, sophisticated networks of exchange, spanning from the Persian Gulf to Japan. European empires are no longer regarded as the only active players on a static Asian background, but rather as newcomers to a vast and complex maritime oikumene crisscrossed by commercial routes, dynastic linkages, and cultural and religious transfers. In this setting, European navigators and traders did not start from a position of either political or economic dominance and generally lacked the capabilities to dictate terms to their Asian counterparts. According to John E. Wills, the eventual rise in the 19th century of European states as colonial victors was preceded by a long process of “interactive emergence” that is not amenable to simple conqueror-conquered dichotomies. To use the concepts coined by xxx, the historiographical landscape has been steadily moving from a “paradigm of power” to a “paradigm of negotiation” that puts the accent on shifting arrangements and unstable pacts with Asian states and merchant communities.

Nowhere is this more evident than in the formation and development of cities such as Macau, Manila and Batavia. The evolution of these cities depended critically on pre-existing networks established by Chinese, Japanese and Malay seafarers. These maritime communities exercised crucial functions of intermediation with local states, allowing Europeans to “find a place on the fringes of Asian orders.” More importantly for the purposes of this chapter, the material construction of Manila and Batavia relied heavily on the labour and organisational expertise provided by Chinese settlers, arriving for the most part from the region of Minnan. In order to sustain and protect their stake in East Asian markets, the Dutch and Spanish alike needed to build, in a short period of time, logistic bases of operations that could function as commercial harbours, administrative headquarters and military centres of power. The development of these capabilities would have been impossible without the large-scale migratory flows that connected maritime-oriented Southern China with Southeast Asia. With different chronologies but at a comparable pace, as Manila and Batavia grew they became points of attraction for thousands of enterprising Fujianese workers, with their own forms of labour and trade organisation, who came to dominate the construction and provision services of both cities.

Historiography (Blusse, Wills, recent contributions: Kueh, Tremml) – Relation to the general topic of the thesis (Social conflict in the light of multi-sited governance and urban space, which constitutes the defining characteristic of my contribution) – Summarise my contribution to the thesis

 

 

# A Chinese *Valido*: The Politics of Intermediation

Despite his Spanish first name and close association with the highest colonial authorities, Manuel Chunquian is described as a *chino infiel*, who chose not to convert to Christianism, unlike other Chinese who rose to prominence in 17th century Manila. Nonetheless, he was allowed to live among the Christian Chinese, thanks to the influence of the Governor. We lack credible information regarding the life and career of Chunquian prior to Corcuera’s governorship, although a Miguel Chunquian, a possible relation, was named *Gobernador de los Sangleyes* in 1619. However, the critics of Corcuera pointed out that Chunquian was not only *infiel*, he was of lowly origin among his own people: a former slave of Captain Lucas de Mañosca, from whom Chunquian purchased his freedom as recently as 1635. [^4] His religious affiliation and supposed *liberto* status were not obstacles to the development of a close rapport with the Governor, who chose Chunquian as his main agent to deal with the Manila Chinese. The charge 21 of Corcuera’s sentence indicates that the Governor had “close friendship and correspondence with Chunquian, infidel sangley, who acted as his proxy in many negotiations, overseeing constructions and gambling games. (…) This sangley used badly of his *valimiento* (favoured position) and had a great part in the uprising of 1639.”

[^4]: AGI FILIPINAS 22 R.1, N.1: *Siendo vil y bajo liverto de esclavo que avia sido en esta ciudad del capitan Lucas de Mañosca, cuyo rescate, pago a sus herederos el año passado de seiscientos y treinta y cinco.*

To the scandal of Spanish society in Manila, Corcuera publicly showed his regard for Chunquian, in ways that were deemed inappropriate and even impious. As a reward for the services rendered to the Crown, he gave to Chunquian a gold chain and medallion in the form of the cross of Alcantara, adressing the Chinese leader as *señor capitán Chunquian* (“lord captain Chunquian”). This present, given in full view of Manila’s public, carried with it a great deal of political weight. It crossed both sacred and secular boundaries by bestowing upon a *chino infiel* a powerful sign of distinction that combined religious significance, social status, and political credit. The *juicio de residencia*’s proceedings emphasise how Chunquian made use of this and other symbols to solidify his position of power within the Chinese community. It states that Chunquian displayed over the gates of his home the coat of arms of the Governor under a *baldoquín*; that is, a ceremonial canopy used in Christian processions and festivities. Outside of the strictly religious realm, it typically signified the sacred origin of monarchical authority. Chunquian also took with him an “ambassadorial safeguard” (*auto de salvaguardia de embajador*), which is likely a document carried by diplomatic envoys to grant them immunity. Manuel Chunquian combined symbols of authority of Hispanic origin with other elements from the Chinese tradition: “(He) carried with him a walking stick with a metal tip (*bastón con casquillo*), servants, sun umbrella (*quitasol*) and other ornaments that represented the superiority and rule he held over his nation.” The insistence on the symbolic character of material objects shown in the *juicio de residencia* points to the importance of a visual language of hybrid nature that embodies and signifies the multiple sources of authority that Chinese intermediaries drew from.

It would be logical to assume that Manuel Chunquian occupied the position of *gobernador de sangleyes*, ostensibly the most powerful and prestigious office available to the Manila Chinese.

The *juicio de residencia* then claims that Manuel Chunquian established himself as the sole conduit of access to the Governor, and hence to the imperial administration. As I explained in the introduction, there was a relation of conflictive interdependence between the Spanish institutions of government and the *Sangley* labourers and traders. As the main intermediary between the two during the governorship of Hurtado de Corcuera, Chunquian could influence the distribution of offices and municipal contracts (*abastos*), tilting the process towards people of his choosing. Chunquian’s influence, unsurprisingly, came at a price. In the charge number 6 of the sentence, we find a list of illicit bribes (*cohechos*) received by Chunquian for a variety of transactions. For example, Domingo Ynhuan paid 110 pesos to Chunquian in exchange for the office of *escribano del gobernador de sangleyes*. However, he was overbid by Domingo Chimbi, who offered 300 pesos. In order to keep the money, Chunquian arranged for Ynhuan to be named secretary (*escribiente*) of Domingo Chimbi. In 1643, Chimbi moved to the position of *gobernador de sangleyes*, ostensibly the highest and most prestigious office available to the Manila Chinese. He paid 250 pesos to Chunquian, plus another 300 pesos the next year for a prorogation of his office. The sums necessary to purchase an office could vary a great deal, possibly indicating how much demand there was for a particular post. Tomas Ngoay spent a staggering 2,000 pesos to be named *gobernador de los sangleyes*, and Domingo Dunio gave 1,250 pesos for the same position. In this last case, the text specifies that Manuel Chunquian acted as *medianero* (go-between) between Dunio and the personal secretary of the Governor, Agustín de Hegoen, who conceivably received the bulk of the payment.

This document also details how Chunquian was involved in the adjudication of municipal contracts for goods and services. Chinqui purchased a monopoly for the sale of sugar cane for 500 pesos. Five Chinese contractors (Texen, Diego Azey, Lucas Yco, Hipolito QuinV and Francisco Vinloa) paid 700 pesos each for the provision of pork meat. The text specifies that the contractors were granted exclusivity to carry out their trade in one specific location: the *Pariancillo de la playa del postigo de palacio*. Although Manuel Chunquian is described as the governor of this place, I have not found other mentions in the sources regarding the existence of this post, so it is not unreasonable to speculate that there were unofficial *gobernadorcillos* who ruled over particular sites with the permission of the Spanish authorities. In the next sections, I will revisit this location and expand on its characteristics and importance, since it constituted a crucial transit point in the urban geography of Manila.

The trial’s sentence goes on to describe in more detail how the Chinese middleman was able to profit from the execution of public projects. This case illustrates the way in which the administration relied on the organisational acumen of Chinese contractors for the construction of Manila’s built environment and the day-to-day provision of the city. Governor Corcuera assigned to Chunquian the task of supervising the construction of a number of buildings (*camarines*) in the aforementioned *Pariancillo de la Playa*. Chunquian was in charge of negotiating the price of materials and daily wages with the heads of trade guilds, such as stone masons (*canteros*), iron smiths (*herreros*), wood-cutters (*madereros*) or tile-makers (*tejeros*), who were responsible for the distribution of payments among the workers of the guild.

As Joseph Kueh points out, it is important to distinguish between the categories used by the Spanish administration and the actual shape of the Chinese labour associations, but it is clear that guild’s heads (described as *cabecillas* or *capitanes*) acted as crucial chains of transmission between the regime and the Chinese population at large, not only in a professional capacity, but more generally as the leaders of social groupings tied together by bonds of solidarity and mutual assistance, described by Philip Kuhn: (quote).

`Bibliography on professional associations:`

The sources indicate that the administration rarely had cash at the ready to pay for the services contracted. Instead, the *cabecillas* received bills of payment (*cartas de pago*) that were later redeemed from the royal treasury. However, the chronic fiscal problems of the Philippine government often hindered the settlement of debts. Having an influential agent could greatly accelerate the process, and a good part of Manuel Chunquian’s power relied precisely on fulfilling that role. Thanks to the business relationships he had fostered with men close to the Governor (an aspect that I will explore in depth in the following pages), Chunquian became an indispensable broker, not only for the Spanish government but also for the Chinese trade associations, who obviously wanted to receive regular and swift payments. Manuel Chunquian charged a hefty price for his services: out of a total of 11,984 pesos owed to the guilds, Manuel Chunquian pocketed 2,393 pesos, a fee that amounted to 20%.

 

 

## Between Empires: Chunquian and the Taiwan-Manila Trade


The importance and centrality of Chinese leaders like Manuel Chunquian in the governance of European-ruled enclaves hinged to a considerable degree on their connection with mercantile networks that linked Fujian with the maritime world of the Nanyang. Their power and standing within urban communities and before the colonial governments was tied to their ability to articulate flows of goods and people from South China to the port-cities of Southeast Asia.

As we saw in chapter 2, “merchant-mediators” like Li Dan and Zheng Zhilong

\- Link to previous section —\> Chunquian was not concerned with internal aspects of Manila’s governance. He also participated in trans-local networks of the Hokkien merchants, through his role in the inspection and taxing of trading ships in Manila Bay. He was associated with Corcuera’s *allegados*, such as Vallecilla and Delgado.

\- As I mentioned, Chunquian acted as *gobernadorcillo* of a place called the *Pariancillo de la playa*, situated in an ideal location to organise smuggling and circumvent inspections (*visitas*).

\- The *Pariancillo* —\> The *Parian* was far from being the only place of residence and business of the Chinese. So what was the *Pariancillo*? What functions did this location served in the urban and trans-local economy?

\- Localising trade, situating smuggling: The practice of smuggling in Manila —\> Yuste, Abasolo. I intend to go from a recognition that smuggling was an omnipresent feature of the economy to a concrete description of how it was carried out —\> It depended critically on the control of transit points, as well as the crafty management of the official documentary process.

\- Restate again the tension between normative and pragmatic —\> Link with the specific moment in time and historical context: the crisis of the Philippine system.

\- Taiwan and the Philippines —\> military hostility but reliance on the same agents and networks.

 

 

## The *Metua* and the Business of Gambling


The most visible and commented-upon activity related to gambling in early modern Manila was the *juego de la metua*. This game of chance was played mostly during the celebration of the Chinese New Year, referred to in the Spanish sources as the Pascua de los Sangleyes. Together with lantern displays, fireworks, and a variety of musical and theatrical entertainments, the metua game was an essential element of Chinese festive culture in Manila.

The friar Cristóbal Pedroche wrote the best available description of the metua, worth quoting in full:

>   [The game] is played by forming a cross on a flat mat from corner to corner. On it, they throw as many chips as one can hold on two hands (these chips are a type of copper coin they use in China, the size of a real segoviano). They count and take out four chips at a time, so at the end, it remains either exactly four, or three, or two, or one. Between the four arms of the cross the players, who can be many, place their bets: those who bet between the first and the second [corners], win with one or two; those between second and third, win with two or three, and so on, so the bank wins with two numbers and loses with the other two. The theft lies in the fact that, when the headmen win, they win entirely, but if they lose, they pay out an eighth less: who bets eight pesos, if he loses, he loses them all, but if he wins, he only wins seven.

The game described here is essentially identical to the *fan tan*, one of the oldest Chinese games of chance. Although it has fallen out of fashion in recent times, all throughout the 19th and early 20th century, fan tan was a very popular form of gambling both in China and in overseas Chinese communities all over the world. While in the Spanish sources the metua is described as essentially an “odds and even” game, the betting combinations of fan tan are substantially more diverse, turning a binary proposition into a more complex matrix of possibilities, with different options for hedging (taking insurance in exchange for a smaller payout) and parlaying (combining wagers for a higher payout) bets. According to Mark Elvin, the game was fair, in the sense that the house and the player had equal probabilities of winning. However, as Pedroche notes, the house took a percentage of the winnings, known as the *coima*, which could vary from 5% to as much as 25%, although the standard rate seemed to have been one-eighth of the pay-out.

Gambling practices were imbricated within crucial aspects of colonial society and articulated underappreciated forms of money transfer, from the general Chinese population to the Spanish officials, as well from poorer Chinese to the wealthy *cabecillas* who acquired the right to set up gambling tables. During the first five days of the New Year Festival, the inhabitants of the Parian were legally allowed to gamble, in exchange for a substantial payment to the governor, known as the *barato de la metua*. This contribution was not part of the official system of taxation, but rather a revenue stream channelled directly to the governor and his closest collaborators. In 1644, the Governor Diego de Fajardo introduced this sum into the royal treasury, and since then it became a stable part of the Philippine fiscal system. The five-day permit was usually extended for another ten days, but only after a further payment. During the second half of the 17th century, the income from the *baratos de la metua* ranged from 4,000 to 8,000 pesos, constituting a not inconsiderable fraction of the treasury’s income, although much diminished from the figures of the early 17th century. From 1645 to 1653, the treasury received a total of 42,450 pesos from the taxation of the *metua* game. Before Fajardo’s time, the figures are less certain, but scattered evidence suggests that the sums involved were somewhat higher before the 1639 rebellion.

In any case, the *barato de la metua* was just the tip of the iceberg. It only represented an advance payment offered by the heads of the *metua* tables (known in the Spanish sources as *coimeros*) to the authorities. As a close associate of governor Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera, Manuel Chunquian achieved the position of *coimero mayor*, or manager of all gambling activities during, and allegedly after, the New Year celebrations. This was an influential and extremely lucrative position, given, as we have seen, that the odds of the *metua* game were heavily tilted in the house’s favour. Chunquian was accused of setting up “more than ninety gambling tables, or *petates*, and on each one a head (*cabeza*) that paid him, day and night, from 30 to 50 pesos.” The profits from this enterprise amounted to more than 20,000 pesos, accumulated in a short period of fifteen days. Furthermore, Chunquian allegedly set up a *petate* that operated year round, making 50 to 70 pesos each day, which added up to another 20,000 pesos annually. As with many other aspects of legal regulation in the Philippines, the prohibition of gambling outside of the established period of the New Year festival was routinely ignored, despite the acrimonious protests of the religious orders.

According to the writings of a number of religious and secular critics, the massive profits accrued by the Governor and different Spanish officials, acting in collusion with Chinese leaders, led them to ignore the social upheavals caused by the large scale of gambling in Manila. In 1711, an attorney of the Real Audiencia defended the complete prohibition of the *metua* would, arguing that this decision would result in the common good of the Chinese community, given that “the artisans (*oficiales mechánicos*), farmers and common people, who are the most numerous, have utter disregard for the games, which only benefit their *cabecillas* and their relatives, who promote them for their own selfish interest.” The Dominican priest Juan de Paz took a more measured stance, asserting that the games might be allowed as a harmless entertainment, provided that there were thorough regulation and oversight in order to avoid religious impiety. However, he condemned a common practice used by the managers of the *metua* games, who set up a forced contribution (or *derrama*) by the whole of the Chinese community, regardless whether they played or not, in order to pay for the *barato* to the Governor and his associates.

Furthermore, Juan de Paz notes that the *cabecillas*, in connivance with the *alcalde mayor del Parián* and other Spanish officials, tried to gather as many people possible in the Parián, using coercive means if necessary, in order to increase the number of players. Indeed, Manuel Chunquian was accused of acting in a similar manner: “He compelled all the sangleys to play, hassling and persecuting those who did not and threatening them with the influence he had by means of being the *valido* of the Governor.” The acts of coercion extended to the supply of beverages and stimulants, such as chocolate, *buyo* (betel nut), and tobacco, that were sent by Spanish officials to the *cabecillas* in exchange for exorbitant sums of money, who then passed the cost to the players by increasing the percentage taken from the payouts to the winners.

Another social problem related to gambling was its adverse effect on commercial relations and credit lines. The festival of the New Year coincided with the start of the trading season in Manila. Chunquian’s sentence states that the Chinese gamblers not only put at risk their own fortune but also “the stock that they brought on commission from merchants of China, to whom they have cheated and broken their credit diminishing the size of the commerce they used to bring.” The text mentions that Spanish and Filipino creditors were equally damaged because the players “have not paid nor satisfied what they borrowed and especially they sold garments and other products that they were consigned to produce, so as to have money with which to play.” As a prominent official and upstanding figure in the Chinese community, one of Manuel Chunquian’s main tasks was to enforce the orderly settlement of debts and to provide an outlet for the resolution of conflicts. Instead, the document asserts, he extended his protection to the gamblers who had reneged their credit agreements, “so there was no justice that would urge them to pay back what they had gambled.” This caused a tremendous disruption in the trade circuits and resulted in the impoverishment of many citizens of Manila, Chinese and Spanish alike.

In conclusion, the business of gambling in Manila served as a thinly disguised racket, from which a small group of people, (e.g. Spanish officials and the Chinese *coimeros*) profited at the expense of the general population. This form of rent extraction by coercive means was exceedingly disruptive for the social order, causing the bankruptcy of crucial economic brokers and throwing many people into abject poverty, to the point that the gambling was considered one of the main causes for the prevalence of suicides among the Manila Chinese. In Chunquian’s sentence, the attorney of the Audiencia argues that excessive gambling losses provoked some Chinese to turn to piracy in the years prior to the rebellion. Indeed, the text informs us that those “led astray by the game” (*los perdidos en el juego*) were instrumental in the affairs leading up to the uprising, “fomenting war and the upsetting the peace and security of the land.” Thirty years later, we find a similar observation by the hand of the Dominican priest Alberto Collares, who observed that gambling had been a crucial factor in all three of the revolts he had witnessed in his lifetime.

 
## The *Licencias de Sangleyes* and the Royal Treasury

One of the focal points of the reforming program laid out by Don Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera upon his arrival to the Philippines was to increase the income derived from the residence licenses paid by the Chinese population (often known as *licencias de sangleyes*). The license was originally a registration form intended to restrict the number of Chinese living in Manila, as well as to weed out unruly individuals without an occupation (generally termed vagos) who could pose a danger to the social order. However, during the governorship of Gomes Pérez das Mariñas the license began to be sold, despite the opposition of the Crown, and it quickly became one of the most lucrative forms of taxation in the Spanish Philippines. In 1594, Philip II insisted that the license should remain free of charge in order to encourage religious conversion and prevent abuses, but the Philippine Governors repeatedly ignored this royal order and relied on the license to fund the massive war effort against the VOC. In origin, the tax was supposed to cover only the cost of printing and distributing the permit among the Chinese population. However, fiscal duress and the lure of profit did away with this cautious approach. The price of a single license increased from two reales in 1594 to 8 pesos (64 reales), in 1610. According to Juan Grau de Monfalcon, by 1636 the residence tax amounted to x% of the treasury’s income, regularly netting over one hundred thousand pesos. Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera wrote to the king that the residence licenses were the “sinews of the royal treasury in these [islands”](scrivcmt://a8bd73b3-6bc2-4f9f-b40b-6a2436039ac1) (*el nervio de la hacienda real en estas islas*). Its expansion, according to the Governor, would go a long way towards balancing the budget and paying the huge debts that the royal treasury had incurred over fifty years of continuous war.

The control over the collection of this sizable duty was a very conflictive issue, pitting different institutional bodies against each other. The *oficiales reales* (the administrators of the royal treasury) repeatedly vied for the responsibility. The Audiencia held the prerogative of organizing the collection of this tax for a short span of time, but after the Chinese revolt of 1603 the Crown adjudicated to the Governor the management of all matters related to the Parián de los Sangleyes, including the license tax, considering that it fell under the purview of military policy. The Audiencia complained bitterly about this change, arguing that the Governors assigned the administration of the licenses to their friends and collaborators, who then overcharged the Chinese for the residence permits and amassed vast sums of [money.](scrivcmt://20fddeb6-16aa-4652-b4cc-f7d48939f150) The collection, however, seems to have been handled in a similar way during the time when the Audiencia had control of the licenses. The problem lied in the system itself, which offered very little legal protection to Chinese residents, who were often forced to pay whatever sum the tax collector asked for or face severe punishments, such as excessive fines, jail or galley service. There were few checks and reviewing procedures on the conduct of tax administrators, especially when they could rely on the protection of the [Governor.](scrivcmt://62c24003-70be-4c0e-bb21-b860e95c7b75)

In this context, the officials in charge of the license (the juez de licencias, the alguacil mayor, and the escribano de licencias) had ample opportunity to profit from the task. In the first place, it was customary for the juez and the alguacil to receive a percentage from the proceedings of each license, which could go from xxx. On top of this, the collectors usually demanded a higher sum than the one legally established for the permit, pocketing the difference. There were also cases in which the juez de licencias printed more licenses that were required, selling the rest in bulk for personal gain. In some cases, there were great disparities between the accounts kept by the juez de licencias and the central accounts of the contador de cuentas (the chief administrator of the royal treasury in the Philippines[).](scrivcmt://e38d0685-8432-4f41-9fd8-9e2eb410f9a5) As the contador Zubiaga repeatedly stressed, the lack of sufficient staff to keep track of the money coming in and out of the royal coffers allowed the collectors of the residential licence (just like the alcaldes mayores and the governors of military outposts mentioned by Zubiaga) routinely claimed to have introduced money in the treasury than later could never be found.

In short, the management of this tax was an extremely profitable endeavour. Furthermore, (licenses as a form of payment)

That is why the anxiety and fear over the size of the Chinese population that one finds frequently in Spanish sources rarely resulted in the enforcement of existing colonial legislation. The economic benefits that the royal treasury derived from the arrival of large numbers of Chinese sojourners were at odds with a stated policy of social control and segregation that aimed to reinforce the political hold of the Monarchy over Manila and its region. During the first half of the 17th century, when Chinese population was at its highest point, the Philippine authorities circulated ten to twenty thousand licences a year, despite the fact that the limit was set at six thousand. The procurador Juan Grau de Monfalcón complained about this issue, mentioning that by 1636 there were more than thirty thousand Chinese and Japanese people in the area around Intramuros. He urged the Governor Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera to restrict the emission of licences in order to bring the Chinese population down to a manageable level. Grau argued that the unchecked arrival of thousands of immigrants increased the chances of an uprising, as indeed came about three years later. Juan Grau’s warnings, however, fell on deaf ears. Hurtado de Corcuera was more concerned with delivering on his promise of making the Philippine treasury self-sufficient than he was worried about the danger of a possible rebellion. Corcuera informed the king that, although more than 25,000 Chinese lived in the Philippines, this was not a cause for concern. Repeating widespread stereotypes regarding the lack of martial mettle of the sangleys, he argued that “were they of a different natural bravery and valour, we could fear them, but they are the most cowardly and spineless people that I have known in Europe and other parts where I have served Your Majesty, and although we are always vigilant there is little to fear.[^5]”

[^5]: AGI FILIPINAS 8 R.3 N.55 “Carta de Corcuera sobre licencias de sangleyes”, 4/06/1636

Corcuera introduced two significant changes in the administration of the residential licences. First, he expanded considerably the number of licenses. He boasted that, while previous governors had only been able to distribute 11 to 13,000 thousand licences each year, in the first six months of his governorship he had already apportioned 19,000, collecting more than 170,000 pesos, with the intention of increasing this number even further and reaching a sum of 200,000 pesos every year. As with many other of Corcuera’s innovations, the Council of Indies took an ambivalent position, responding that “while this measure does not seem badly considered (…) it would be necessary to look closely at how this increase of duties is attempted and achieved, so as not to endanger trade (…) or the security of the land.” The Council assigned the Governor and the Audiencia the delicate task of balancing the benefits of this plan with the likely perils derived from its execution. The constant bickering between these two governing bodies made this goal all the more difficult to achieve. In short, there was seldom a unified and consistent policy regarding the amount of the residence licenses, and therefore of the management of segregation, an insight that I will expand upon in the last section of this chapter.

Second, Corcuera increased the cost of the residential licence, which went from nine pesos minus one real (that is, 71 reales), to ten pesos plus the customary two reales for printing and administrative costs, adding up to 82 reales. This raise was, in fact, a tax on the change of residence. Corcuera explained that a great number of Chinese people had established themselves outside of the Parián, developing ranches and estates, many of them owned by Spanish citizens and religious [orders.](scrivcmt://450c87e4-56d0-4494-8af3-21c0df499e24) These agricultural workers lacked government permits, which put them in a precarious position, subject to the harassment and extortion of soldiers and officials. The Manila Chinese sent numerous petitions to the colonial authorities, asking to be legally allowed to occupy and develop the lands around Manila. Governor Corcuera negotiated a compromise with the leaders of the sangley community, granting them the right to settle outside in Parián in exchange for the tax increase. The people who remained within the Chinese quarter would pay an ordinary license, written in black ink, while those who established residence and businesses outside the Parián were obliged to purchase a special license, inscribed in red ink, for a higher price. This distinction caused untold confusion and allowed Simón Delgado, a man close to the Governor, to reap enormous profits. Delgado held the crucial post of juez de licencias, as well as other important positions like visitador (port inspector) and contador (exchequer) of the Caja de la Comunidad de los sangleyes.

Despite the history of fraught relations with the Chinese of Manila, the Governor assured the Council of Indies that the Chinese were overjoyed with his rule and that his policies had been received “with goodwill and no resistance whatsoever.” Judging by the subsequent events, this claim seems extremely suspect. It is impossible to know whether Corcuera believed his own words or was rather justifying before the Council of Indies what he knew was a risky policy change bound to once again sour the relations with the Chinese community, resulting in the general rebellion of 1639. The introduction of a special duty for residence outside of the Parián must have been particularly difficult to assume for the large number of impoverished farmers located in Laguna de Bay, Santa Cruz, and Tondo, who went on to form the core of the 1639 rebellion. On the other hand, Chinese traders, contractors and heads of artisanal guilds usually lived within the Parian’s perimeter. The leaders of the sangley community and main interlocutors with the government came from this latter group, who were generally wealthier, better established in colonial society and more likely to convert to Catholicism than agricultural workers, who tended to be new arrivals, with fewer connections and often in debt in order to pay for the travel to Manila and the heavy burden of the head tax (tributo) and the residential license. This reminds us of the internal diversity of the sangley community and demonstrates the degree of inequality that existed between the different groups that composed Manila’s Chinese population, bound together by forms of economic and social organisation that are still not fully described in the literature.

What is clear is that Governor Corcuera could not have pushed through such an increase in fiscal exaction without the collaboration of Chinese intermediaries, the most notable of which was undoubtedly Manuel Chunquian. Besides the evidence included in Corcuera’s trial, we also have a document from 1645 that points to Chunquian as the main agent of the Governor in regards to the Chinese community. Written by Jacinto Gali, a Dominican priest and vicario of the Parian, this testimony describes Manuel Chunquian as the “hands and feet” of the Governor, a man who instilled such fear in his compatriots “that whoever resisted his will knew for certain that it would cost him dearly.” Jacinto Gali goes on to relate how used Manuel Chunquian threats and violence to coerce his countrymen into lending “12,000 or 18,000 pesos” from the Caja de la Comunidad de los Sangleyes to the royal treasury, knowing that this would ingratiate him with the Governor. Moreover, he suppressed the rumblings of dissatisfaction and talk of outright rebellion that were circulating around Manila and convinced the Governor that his policies would meet no resistance. Instead, he offered Corcuera “a great paper” (un gran papel), in the name of the sangley community, thanking the Governor for the good governance and unfailing justice he showed towards them, “as well as other flatteries without any truth (…) given that they were already concocting the rebellion.”

 
# The 1639 Rebellion and its Aftermath


The question of ethnic conflict between the Chinese and Spanish communities of Manila is one of the most conspicuous topics of discussion in Philippine history. The so-called *Sangley* rebellions of 1603, 1639, 1662 and 1686 are crucial events in the history of colonial Manila, and their study can tell us a great deal about social interaction and power relations. A good number of historians have been drawn to the issue, as it highlights a key set of questions in relation to the development of cross-cultural commercial relations throughout history: How did peoples with contrasting, often hostile, cultural backgrounds managed to live together and trade in the port-cities of the Early Modern period? How was social order, political stability and legal frameworks established at "hybrid" enclaves, characterized by ethnic diversity? Why did these arrangements break down at specific times, and how were they rebuilt and renewed? What was the extent and impact of coercive violence and racial discrimination in the everyday life of individuals and groups, depending on their perceived origin and social status? These matters are of great importance not just from a historical perspective; they constitute one of the most pressing political concerns of our contemporary world. While history might not be able to provide clear-cut answers or ready-made policy reccommendations, it can illustrate some reocurring patterns under which inter-ethnic conflict has arisen.


## What's in a name? On the term "rebellion" as applied to the 1639 war

Traditional accounts of Philippine history invariably use "rebellion" to characterize the events, following the usage that we find in Spanish sources.[^1] Considering that the writing of Philippine history has only recently stepped outside the bounds of a Catholic framework of interpretation, it is not surprising that these historical works[^2] tend to follow the rationale and narrative schemes of earlier Church chronicles.[^3] The majority of chroniclers (Pedro Chirino, Diego de Aduarte, Gaspar de San Agustín) blamed the Chinese for plotting the overthrow of the Spanish government, while assserting that the Spanish authorities reacted in the spirit of self-preservation, with the sole objective of maintaining the peace against illegitimate uprisers. The affirmation of legitimacy and lawful Spanish sovereignty over the Philippine Islands, shaken by the insidious actions of "foreigners", was of tantamount importance, second only to the conservation of the Catholic Church's evangelical domain on the Islands. Authors from a secular background, such as Bartolomé Leonardo de Argensola and Antonio de Morga, give a similar interpretation of the events, in which cultural difference, and indeed the cultural inferiority and moral wickedness of Chinese people, is emphasized. Morga, for example, writes: "for, not only can there be little security to the country with so many infidels, but the *sangleys* are a wicked and vicious race. Through intercourse and communication with them, the natives improve little in Christianity and morals. And since they come in such numbers and are so great eaters, they raise the price of provisions, and consume them."[^4] The Spanish depiction of the Chinese residents in the Philippines often contrasts duplicity and moral depravity with industriousness and an irreplaceable economic role, lamenting the unfortunate but inescapable contamination of a budding branch of the Christian faith by unbelieving outsiders.

[^1]: In the Spanish documentation we find the following synonymous words: rebelión, alzamiento, sublevación, levantamiento, insurrección.

[^2]: See for example: Antonio M. Molina, Historia de Filipinas, 2 Vols (Madrid, 1984); Patricio Hidalgo Nuchera, Los primeros de Filipinas: crónicas de la conquista del archipiélago de San Lázaro (Madrid: Miraguano Ediciones, 1995).

[^3]: Diego Aduarte et al., Historia De La Provincia Del Santo Rosario De Filipinas, Iapón Y China, De La Sagrada Orden De Predicadores (Gascon, 1693); Francisco Colin ((S.I.)) and Pedro Chirino, Labor evangelica, ministerios apostólicos de los obreros de la Compañia de Iesus, fundacion y progressos de su provincia en las islas Filipinas (por Ioseph Fernandez de Buendia, 1663).

[^4]: Include translation: Antonio de Morga, Sucesos de Las Islas Filipinas, 1609. The examples of derogatory writings against the *sangleys* are too many too count; the interested reader can find a good summary in Juan Gil, Los Chinos en Manila, p. xxx

Religious and political considerations continued to influence the analysis of the "*sangley* rebellions" during the Modern period. The collection of essays *Chinese in Philippine Life* constitutes a good example of the interrelation of contemporary social and political conflicts with the study of Chinese engagement in the Philippine archipelago. Published in 1968 (?), the fraught relation between Communist China with the US-backed Philippines clearly coloured the overall rationale of the book, even if not all the individual contributions follow the rather Sinophobic bent of the introduction.

While Juan Gil certainly does not buy into the anti-Chinese bias of the afore-mentioned book, he agrees that the cultural difference between Chinese and Spaniards was acute and unsurmountable, as well as the main motivating factor of the repeated violent encounters. To use his expression, a "cultural moat" stood between the Chinese and Spanish populations. The linguistic barriers, religious hostilities and difference in custom, tradition and habit were too deeply ingrained to allow any real cultural engagement between the two communities, resulting in the kind of hybrid, mixed culture that we can find in Macau, for example. In Juan Gil's estimation, Chinese and Spanish peoples managed to live by necessity, for no other reason than economic self-interest.


## A Summary of the Main Events

One of the three main contemporary accounts of the episode that have survived does mention Nicolas Iquan (the name by which the Portuguese and Spanish referred to Zheng Zhilong) as a conspirator in the uprising. However, the automatic connection between lack of trade and rebellion is problematic. For one thing, all three of the main sources acknowledge that the revolt did not originate in the Parian of Manila, where most of the Chinese merchants and workers of the city resided. The insurrection started in Calamba, situated to the south of Manila, in Laguna de Bay. The governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera wanted to drain and cultivate a strip of land belonging to the city. The purpose was to shore up the supply of rice and other edibles for the military garrison of Manila and its surroundings, thus saving the royal treasury of a considerable expense.

Calamba was located on a marshy plain, infested with mosquitoes. It was a breeding ground for infections and illnesses, and for this reason the plans to exploit the land, concocted by the governor Nino de Tavora in the late 1620s, never took off. Corcuera, however, was determined to increase the income of the royal treasury, often “with more enthusiasm than wisdom,” as one source informs us. He decided to use forced labour in order to put the land into operation. Corcuera ordered the local authorities (*alcaldes mayores*) of villages around Manila to round up the resident Chinese and send them to Calamba, where the *alcalde* Luis Arias de Mora would organize and carry out the project of cultivation. About two thousand Chinese farmers and agrarian workers, as well as stone masons, were dislodged from their places of residence and occupations, and were compelled to toil in the infested marshes around Laguna de Bay, with little or no pay. The terrible working conditions and the harsh treatment by Spanish overseers caused high rates of mortality. To top it off, this agrarian venture was never profitable, due to the low price of rice. The anonymous Jesuit who wrote the *Subcesos de las Islas Filipinas desde agosto de 1639 hasta el de 1640* gave us a succinct but cogent interpretation of the uprising that paid little mind to Pedro de Quiroga or traders in the Parian:

>   Sebastian (Hurtado de Corcuera), desiring to increase his Majesty’s treasury, put a great number of Chinese farmers in some big plane, irrigated and made fertile by rivers, and it is called Calamba. Many of these Chinese were forced and against their will. Over the last few months many fell sick, and they say more than three hundred died, so they were even more desperate, and it is known how unhealthy the place is. The time to pay the licence came, which is more than 25 pesos for each one. They (the *sangleys*) were compelled to pay. They had no money, so they have burst into this uprising.

>   *El señor D. Sebastian, deseoso de que la hacienda de su Magestad crezca, metio gran numero de labradores chinos en unas grandes llanadas que las riegan y hacen fertile algunos rios y se llaman Calamba. muchos destos fueron forzados y contra su voluntad. Cayeron los meses pasados muchos enfermos, y dicen murieron dellos mas de 300, con que se desesperaron mas, y conocidamente es malsano el temple. Llego el tiempo de la licencia y terrazgo, que pasa de 25 pesos cada uno. Apretaronles para la paga. No se hallaron con caudal, con que an venido a reventar en este alzamiento.* 

In short, the sources indicate that the uprising was caused not by declining trade, but by increased fiscal pressure and demands of forced labour. Taken to Calamba and compelled to work in an unprofitable undertaking, these *sangleys* were unable to procure the money to cover the high cost of residential licenses and other taxes. We have no documents indicating that the same situation was being reproduced in the Parian of Manila, although it is likely. However, not every Chinese inhabitant of the Philippines was a merchant, and not every Sangley merchant was a permanent resident in the city. In fact, November, when the “rebellion” started, was a low season in Manila’s cycle of trade, which was at its most active from late February or March, when the *sampan* merchants arrived from China and Taiwan, to July, when the galleons departed. In order to arrive at a convincing explanation of the 1639 conflict, as well as to gauge its impact on trade during the subsequent period, we need to analyze carefully the internal composition of the Sangley community, underscoring the differences in wealth and status that underpinned the organization of Chinese society in the Philippines. To put it simply, while the obstruction of the galleon trade likely affected every citizen and resident in Manila and its environs, some groups and individuals were more vulnerable than others, and they were those in the more precarious position that had less to lose, and therefore were more likely to react against Spanish abuse.

Lack of sources makes difficult to clearly illustrate this point, but based on the partial evidence that we have, it seems clear to me that the destruction of Manila’s Parian and the ensuing indiscriminate massacre of Chinese inhabitants occurred as a result, not of a Sangley act of aggression, but of a pre-emptive Spanish attack after the agrarian revolt reached dangerous proportions. All three of the documents mentioned before follow the same outline. After killing the *alcade mayor* Luis Arias de Mora and some other Spaniards, around two thousand Chinese marched towards Manila, increasing their numbers as they went along, convincing or forcing other *sangleys* to join them in their advance. Hounded by Spanish and Filipino forces, the insurrects reached Santa Cruz, on the opposite side of the river Passig from Manila. Santa Cruz was a major Chinese settlement, and when most of the *sangleys* joined the uprising, the situation reached its utmost point of tension.

The sources diverge here in their interpretation, with the *Relacion de la Real Academia* asserting that the Chinese of the Parian dealt the first blow, killing some Spaniards and mulattoes and attempting to cross the river in order to reach the main group of Sangley insurrects. The rest of the sources, however, coincide in an alternative version. The Parian was under relative calm, when about five hundred *sangleys* from Santa Cruz crossed the Passig intending to rouse the population of the Parian. When Corcuera observed this development, fearing that the overwhelming advantage in numbers of the *sangleys* would surpass the defences of Manila, he commanded the artillery to fire upon the Chinese quarter, which quickly burned and was reduced to rubble. A wholesale slaughter then took place in Intramuros, where many Chinese were employed by the Spanish.

After these events, the situation was brought under relative control in Manila, but the remaining group of rebels continued to march towards the north, probably in search of an escape through the port of Nueva Segovia, in the province of Cagayan. They were cut off by a company of Spanish and Pampanga soldiers, and then the *sangleys* veered to the east. Harassed from all sides, greatly reduced in number and weakened by four months of continuous war, the rebel group had little chance of success left. More than seven thousand Chinese surrendered to the Spanish authorities and were granted a pardon, although two thousand of them died shortly due to “wounds and exhaustion.”


# Contested Spaces: The Parián and Binondo after the Revolt

On March of 1640, after four months of continuous war, the Jesuit priest xxx and General Jerónimo Enríquez managed to negotiate the rendition of the 7,000 starved and weary troops that remained from the tens of thousands that had originally taken up arms against the regime. The Spanish soldiers formed a double column, through which the were obliged to pass and throw away their weapons. After encamping in the parade-ground of Bagumbaya, the repressing forces and the defeated rebels marched through the city:

>   In the vanguard went Captain Juan Fiallo with the cavalry, to the sound of trumpets; next some companies of Pampango infantry, those of the Cagayan Indians, the Zambal archers, and the Indians who carried javelins and shields in the battalion. Next came all the Sangley forces, and in the rearguard the Spanish infantry, with the master-of-camp. The halberdiers of the governor followed, and in their midst was one on horseback, who carried as a standard the image of the blessed Christ from Antipolo, mounted on a staff. Last of all came the governor, accompanied by his suite, and by many volunteer horsemen who had gone to the war.

The ceremonial parade crossed the city through San Antón street, then passed the bridge towards Tondo, on the other side of the Pasig River, where the Governor had chosen to relocate the Parián de los Sangleyes. The new site was surrounded on all sides by a wooden stockade, from which the place took the name which bears to this day: Estacada. The enclosure was guarded by two companies of Pampango soldiers. Five years later, the Parián returned to its original location, and another ceremony marked the appropriation of the same space a by specific legal body known as the Común de los Sangleyes Cristianos y Mestizos de Sangley.

In this section, I delve into the thorny issue of colonial segregation and the making and remaking of urban space, questioning the narrow focus on the agency of Spanish authorities as the engineers of Manila’s built form and ethnic distribution. The power invested in the imperial agents was indeed a crucial factor, but it was expressed on the production of urban space by way of constant negotiation and compromise regarding boundaries and the proper place of communities. Moreover, the Spanish did not form a cohesive and unified camp, but rather encompassed a variety of institutional bodies with diverging interests. The adjudication of jurisdictional oversight and redistribution of rents which resulted from it was a hotly disputed affair, which had a direct effect on the application of policies regarding the configuration of urban space.

## Segregation and the Formation of Urban Communities

A theoretical and historiographical appraisal of the issue of segregation Main point: the spatialization of ethnic communities has been approached from a top-down perspective, as the imposition of colonial order. We need to complement this perspective with an examination of other processes of community formation, which trascend and transgress the spatial boundaries set up in the colonial legislation. These were a normative ideal, applied flexibly and intermittently, forming a contested field of competing priorities rather than a uniform, concerted action by a single-minded colonial centre. This does not aim to invalidate or diminish the degree of oppression motivated by perceived cultural difference or danger; instead I seek to arrive at a more nuanced

## The Relocation of the Parián and its Discontents

The razing of the Parian costed the city an enormous amount of money (in some contemporary estimations up to 5 million pesos, although this number is probably exaggerated). Governor Corcuera was not one to let a crisis go to waste, and he took advantage of the rebellion’s messy aftermath to relocate the Parian to the other side of the Pasig River, on the town of Baybay. The objective of the governor was to further isolate the Chinese residents, building a wall around the market and establishing a permanent guard of two military companies, inspired, in his own words “by the Jewish ghettos of Alexandria and Rome.” The relocation was seen by many in Manila as a misguided, self-interested decision, and objections were soon put forward. The *procurador* of Manila, (representative of the city before the court of Madrid) Juan Grau de Monfalcón, backed by the *Cabildo* (council house), protested the move in a letter to the king, arguing the new Parian was out of the reach of the artillery. He also pointed out that the very isolation of the place could work in favor of the *sangleys* in the event of a new insurrection, because they would have enough time to fortify the compound of the new Parián. Moreover, he advised against the new location on account of its proximity to the sea and remoteness from the city. There were also economic considerations at play: the new location was a “great inconvenience” to the residents of Intramuros, which very went frequently to the Parian in order to purchase products and services. This illustrates the tension created out of the double function of the Parian: a segregated space, which calls for fixity in place and a certain degree of isolation, but also a marketplace and productive center, which required easy access and freedom of movement to function efficiently.

As we can gather, the motivation for Corcuera's plan went beyond concerns about security, and so did the *Cabildo*'s protests. The rents from the Parian's shops and houses was allocated to religious and municipal institutions, and members of the council house, and Corcuera wished to change the terms of this redistribution of rents in order to benefit his allies in the city. This, of course, roused the opposition of those affected (the city council, the Audiencia, the religious orders). The *procurador* Juan Grau de Monfalcón, backed by the *Cabildo* (council house), protested the relocation in a letter to the king, arguing the new Parian was out of the reach of the artillery. He also pointed out that the very isolation of the place could work in favour of the *sangleys* in the event of a new insurrection, because they would have enough time to barricade and fortify the compound of the new Parián. Most of all, he advised against the new location on account of its proximity to the sea and remoteness from the city. This had not just military consequences: it represented a “great inconvenience” to the residents of Intramuros, which very often went (or sent their servants and slaves) to the Parian in order to purchase products and services. In short, changing the site of the Parián to the other side of the river increased considerably the time and money spent in everyday shopping.[^5]

[^5]: AGI FILIPINAS 28, N. 25 “Memorial de Juan Grau de Monfalcón”

By the time the royal answer to the letter of Juan Grau arrived to Manila, the new Parian was already up and running. This *real cédula* summarised concisely the arguments against the relocation and ordered against the decision of Sebastián de Corcuera:

>   That nobody will want to build in this place on account of being far away from the city and so close to the sea and not subjected to the artillery, because even when it (the Parian) was located under the artillery there have been uprisings, and that it would be easier the *sangleys* to revolt in the place where he (Corcuera) wants to build it because they could be assisted in their treason through the sea, and they could fortify it on account of not being subjected to the artillery like it is in the Parian that was positioned closer to the city. [^6]

[^6]: Que nadie querrá fabricar en el dicho sitio por estar lejos de la ciudad y tan cercano a la mar y no sujeto a la artilleria, pues estando fundado debajo de ella no han estado libres de los alsamientos y que vendrían a tener más comodidad los sangleyes quando se quisiesen lebantar en el lugar donde pretende fundarle por poder ser socorridos en sus traiciones por la mar y poderle fortificar por no tener la sujecion de la artilleria como la tienen en el parian que estava fundado cerca de la ciudad. AGI FILIPINAS 62, N.1 “Cédula real para la reedificación del Parián, de 24 de octubre de 1642”

The new governor, Diego Fajardo, concurred with Grau de Monfalcón. The new site of the Parián was considerably weaker from a military perspective. The old location was “all surrounded by streams (*esteros*), under the artillery and it was of small circumference.” He directed the construction of a new market in its accustomed location, giving detailed instructions for its layout in order to facilitate the repression in case of a new flare up in the hostilities between Chinese and Spanish. He emphasised the need to build straight, ample roads on the Parian “so the artillery can sweep easily any kind turmoil.”[^7]

[^7]: AGI FILIPINAS 62, N.1, “Auto del governador para la reedificación del Parián del 19de Enero de 1645”

The motivations of Corcuera's plan went beyond concerns for security, and so did the *Cabildo*'s protests. The renting of the Parian's stores was allocated to different corporations and members of the council house, and Corcuera was trying to change the composition of the renters to benefit his allies in the city. This and other sources of revenue related to Chinese residents and visitors (such as license of residence for the *sangleys*, impositions on the gambling and the celebration of Chinese festivities, taxes on offices held by *sangleys* and mestizos, and of course taxes on trade like the *almojarifazgo*) were essential for both the royal and municipal treasuries. Some of these contributions were directly related to the control and restriction of mobility, like the fines imposed on Chinese residents that left the Parian at night.[^8] The political economy of social and spatial control is a fascinating aspect of the historical problem I advanced in this paper, as are the ambiguities introduced by the increase in miscegenation and conversion during the 17th century. This document illustrates a clear pattern in the discourses and practices of the Spanish colonial authorities, showing that often they sought to solve social problems of intercultural conflict through spatial control and restrictions of movement.

[^8]: Juan Gil, Los Chinos en Manila, siglos XVI y XVII. 675-677.

I will focus on a memorial written by the Dominican Vittorio Ricci, supporting a project to expel all the non-Christian Chinese from the Philippine islands. It is a very rich document of about 24 pages. It expresses a very negative view of the Chinese of Manila, hammering down one point: the *sangleys* were a polluting influence that contaminated the religious space of the Philippines, perverting the Filipinos (mainly Tagalo, Pampanga and Visayan) with their innumerable vices. In his view, the non-Christian Chinese should be allowed only for trade, and the crafts and services they provide should be passed to *mestizos de Sangley* and natives of the islands. In a certain way, Ricci and the supporters of expulsion wanted to have their cake and eat it too: maintain the Galleon trade while completely changing the social configuration of the city. An interesting aspect of this source is frequent references to the expulsions of Jews and Moriscos from Spain in 1492 and 1611, respectively. This method of dealing with "unholy" elements is, in a way, an extension of the policies of segregation. The presence of these set of attitudes and practices in the Philippines show their transmission from Spain by way of the Americas, maintaining a similar basic structure that is adapted to new circumstances: in the setting of the Philippines, the *sangleys* are equated with Jews and Moors, while the wide variety of Filipino sociolinguistic and ethnic groups are all referred to as Indians.

Interestingly, some sources also point to China and Japan as examples of how to deal with foreigners. In the words of Ricci: “It is notable the trust of the generous Spanish nation, but it should not be so extended that one day we will find ourselves in jeopardy. We see just the opposite in China, where is so great the fear of foreigners that they dont allow them in any way, and if in some occasion a missionary manages to enter, they keep him under a tight watch, as if he would swallow the empire whole.” Some pages after he says about Japan: “we should deal with Chinese as the Japanese do, they admit their commerce only in a designated place, and they count them both when they enter and when they leave, not allowing a single one of the Chinese stay.”

Later on, Ricci makes another very interesting comment that is worth quoting in full:

>   There is no place secluded enough that the Sangley has not infiltrated, so they know the land and have more news about it that the Spanish, who are rulers of these islands.(...) A further inconvenience is that by letting them (the Chinese) enter in the city and the houses they know everything that in them happens, because they talk with servants and blacks and in this way learn about every good and bad thing that comes about (...) A Christian Sangley told a missionary settled in China: Father, I am an old hound of Manila, and I know that the Spanish women are all a bunch of (I dont utter the word because it is dishonest and its meaning can be understood). And the missionary asked very upset: how you say that, being Christian? Precisely because I am Christian, responded the *sangley*, I have entered in every house there is in Manila. (…) It is not convenient that they be allowed to communicate or see our houses or our customs.[^9]

[^9]: AGI FILIPINAS 330, L.4, 42v44r.

This passage shows that the concerns about the unimpeded mobility of the Chinese population went beyond military security or even religious virtue, but expresses a certain fear that foreign, unholy elements would penetrate and pollute the intimate space of the houses, and therefore, the lives of the Spanish. The control of macro-mobility, of extensive movements of migration and trade, is coupled here with the restriction of what we may call micro-mobility or mobility within the town. It shows also fear of the spread of uncontrolled information in the hands of a perceived enemy.

To conclude, I would say that the perspective outlined here take us in a rather different direction than the one pursued by Dennis O'Flynn and Arturo Giráldez. Even though Flynn and Giráldez made Manila the central pivot of their historical revision of early modern globalization, by focusing on creation of a world market for silver, the question of how the city came to be and how it evolved over the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was mostly passed by. Of course, this is not a shortcoming of their work but a deliberate decision to frame their research in world historical terms, emphasizing planetary connections and broad patterns of historical evolution. However, it may give the impression that Manila was a sort of black box, simply facilitating the exchange. Instead, I would suggest we direct our gaze to the frictions and conflicts, and their expression in urban patterns, which accompanied the formation of the Mexico-Manila-China trade complex. By shifting the focus from the macro-mobility of large-scale, *long durče* processes of intercontinental exchange to the management of micro-mobility and social relations in an urban setting, we can open a window into the social morphology of cities on which global trade networks were built. In short, global cities in the Early Modern should be understood not just as links in a global circulation process, but also as complex systems of filters and as arrangement of local boundaries that constrained the possibilities and defined the nature of a given interaction. The limits of early modern globalization are not only technological or economic, but also social: in the case of Manila, this refers to the difficulty of fitting new networks of mobility into existing conceptions of what a "moral society", a political republic, and a religious community should look like.

## Reclaiming space, signifying possession: the 1645 petition of the Común de los Cristianos Sangleyes y Mestizos de Sangley

Who were evicted from Baybay in 1640 in order to make room for the new Parian. In 1645, after Hurtado de Corcuera left his position (and was actually indicted and jailed for numerous acts of corruption), the leaders of *común de los cristianos sangleys y mestizos de sangley* sent a petition to the new governor, Diego de Fajardo, to reclaim their customary site of residence. The petition was accompanied by a sketch of Baybay, drawn in 1645 but copied from an earlier map produced in 1602, which is the earliest graphic representation of Manila that I am aware of.

We will look at this map with more detail in a moment, but first I would like to highlight the most salient elements of this petition, and call attention to the way that the claiming and appropriation of space was justified and carried out under the institutional framework of the Hispanic Monarchy. The case put forward by the *mestizos de sangley*, supported by the declaration of witnesses, hinged on two main factors: 1) Precedence in occupation, proven by the sworn statements of members of the former Tagalog royalty. 2) Improvement and transformation of the environment by the *mestizos de sangley.* 

The choice of witnesses is revelatory in itself. A first petition elevated to the Audiencia (royal court) was turned down, because, according to the royal attorney, the petitioners lacked written records of ownership. The *mestizo* leaders then presented the testimony of six witnesses, chosen because of their old age and standing in Tagalog, Chinese and Spanish society. The first witness is Don Agustín Managui, son of Lacandola, former King of Manila, who said was about 15 years old when the Spanish arrived to the Philippines.

Don Agustin declared that: “He heard his father and grandfather say that they granted said place of Baybay long ago to these *sangleys* so they may live in it, and originally was a very small piece of land.”

Further down, he supports the allegation that this particular group of *sangleys* had peacefully and customarily occupied the land of Baybay, without opposition of the native Tagalog population. He argues that: *“He is certain that nobody contradicted their possession, nor the natives of the land or anybody else, because the only one who could rightly challenge it was this witness, as the owner and successor to the lands of Manila, which belonged to this father and grandfather before the arrival of the Spanish.”*

This statement highlights the continuity of certain forms of native Tagalog authority in the allocation of space, even after the conquest of the Philippines, alerting us to the fact that 1571, much like 1492, was not a clean break from the past.

Another witness is Francisco Bayon, who is described as a citizen of Manila and a Spaniard, but also a grandson of the King of Cebu and the son of the first Spanish man who married a woman from the native nobility. He declares that: “he remembers seeing that formerly the place of Baybay was not as broad, as it was covered with seawater.””

Pedro de Vera, who was head of the Sangley builder’s guild and *alarife* (master builder) of Manila, expanded on this matter:

“Due to the sea-gales the terrain of the site facing the beach was growing, and he also observed in different times that the *mestizos* built terraces in some of the lowlands, with what, in time, its settlement developed.”

“And he expelled from the place *cafres*, Spaniards, Sangley fishers, Blacks and others, giving them to understand that said piece of land belonged to the commons on the Christian *sangleys* and Mestizos de *sangleys*”

“And with those expelled, he commanded the said lieutenants and sergeant-majors to enter inside and open and close doors and windows, and lift stones from the ground, and tear out grass and disperse in signal of true, juridical and royal possession.”

As we have seen, the petition frames the relocation of the Parián as an unlawful and arbitrary exercise of power, which disrupted the legitimate and peaceful occupation of Baybay. The symbolic performance of spatial re-appropriation is tied to the juridical performance of representation, within the institutional framework of the Hispanic Monarchy. In this manner, a group of people defines itself and is acknowledged as a particular and distinct social body, lawfully claiming its proper place within the urban landscape. In addition, this act appropriation involves the exclusion of others from said place, through the enforcement of spatial boundaries.

 

Conclusion
==========
