Chapter 4. The 1639 Rebellion and its Aftermath
===============================================

The question of ethnic conflict between the Chinese and Spanish communities of Manila is one of the most conspicuous topics of discussion in Philippine history. The so-called *Sangley* rebellions of 1603, 1639, 1662 and 1686 are crucial events in the history of colonial Manila, and their study can tell us a great deal about social interaction and power relations. A good number of historians have been drawn to the issue, as it highlights a key set of questions in relation to the development of cross-cultural commercial relations throughout history: How did peoples with contrasting, often hostile, cultural backgrounds managed to live together and trade in the port-cities of the Early Modern period? How was social order, political stability and legal frameworks established at "hybrid" enclaves, characterized by ethnic diversity? Why did these arrangements break down at specific times, and how were they rebuilt and renewed? What was the extent and impact of coercive violence and racial discrimination in the everyday life of individuals and groups, depending on their perceived origin and social status? These matters are of great importance not just from a historical perspective; they constitute one of the most pressing political concerns of our contemporary world. While history might not be able to provide clear-cut answers or ready-made policy reccommendations, it can illustrate some reocurring patterns under which inter-ethnic conflict has arisen.

What's in a name? On the term "rebellion" as applied to the 1639 war
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Traditional accounts of Philippine history invariably use "rebellion" to characterize the events, following the usage that we find in Spanish sources.[^1] Considering that the writing of Philippine history has only recently stepped outside the bounds of a Catholic framework of interpretation, it is not surprising that these historical works[^2] tend to follow the rationale and narrative schemes of earlier Church chronicles.[^3] The majority of chroniclers (Pedro Chirino, Diego de Aduarte, Gaspar de San Agustín) blamed the Chinese for plotting the overthrow of the Spanish government, while assserting that the Spanish authorities reacted in the spirit of self-preservation, with the sole objective of maintaining the peace against illegitimate uprisers. The affirmation of legitimacy and lawful Spanish sovereignty over the Philippine Islands, shaken by the insidious actions of "foreigners", was of tantamount importance, second only to the conservation of the Catholic Church's evangelical domain on the Islands. Authors from a secular background, such as Bartolomé Leonardo de Argensola and Antonio de Morga, give a similar interpretation of the events, in which cultural difference, and indeed the cultural inferiority and moral wickedness of Chinese people, is emphasized. Morga, for example, writes: "for, not only can there be little security to the country with so many infidels, but the *sangleys* are a wicked and vicious race. Through intercourse and communication with them, the natives improve little in Christianity and morals. And since they come in such numbers and are so great eaters, they raise the price of provisions, and consume them."[^4] The Spanish depiction of the Chinese residents in the Philippines often contrasts duplicity and moral depravity with industriousness and an irreplaceable economic role, lamenting the unfortunate but inescapable contamination of a budding branch of the Christian faith by unbelieving outsiders.

[^1]: In the Spanish documentation we find the following synonymous words: rebelión, alzamiento, sublevación, levantamiento, insurrección.

[^2]: See for example: Antonio M. Molina, Historia de Filipinas, 2 Vols (Madrid, 1984); Patricio Hidalgo Nuchera, Los primeros de Filipinas: crónicas de la conquista del archipiélago de San Lázaro (Madrid: Miraguano Ediciones, 1995).

[^3]: Diego Aduarte et al., Historia De La Provincia Del Santo Rosario De Filipinas, Iapón Y China, De La Sagrada Orden De Predicadores (Gascon, 1693); Francisco Colin ((S.I.)) and Pedro Chirino, Labor evangelica, ministerios apostólicos de los obreros de la Compañia de Iesus, fundacion y progressos de su provincia en las islas Filipinas (por Ioseph Fernandez de Buendia, 1663).

[^4]: Include translation: Antonio de Morga, Sucesos de Las Islas Filipinas, 1609. The examples of derogatory writings against the *sangleys* are too many too count; the interested reader can find a good summary in Juan Gil, Los Chinos en Manila, p. xxx

Religious and political considerations continued to influence the analysis of the "*sangley* rebellions" during the Modern period. The collection of essays *Chinese in Philippine Life* constitutes a good example of the interrelation of contemporary social and political conflicts with the study of Chinese engagement in the Philippine archipelago. Published in 1968 (?), the fraught relation between Communist China with the US-backed Philippines clearly coloured the overall rationale of the book, even if not all the individual contributions follow the rather Sinophobic bent of the introduction.

While Juan Gil certainly does not buy into the anti-Chinese bias of the afore-mentioned book, he agrees that the cultural difference between Chinese and Spaniards was acute and unsurmountable, as well as the main motivating factor of the repeated violent encounters. To use his expression, a "cultural moat" stood between the Chinese and Spanish populations. The linguistic barriers, religious hostilities and difference in custom, tradition and habit were too deeply ingrained to allow any real cultural engagement between the two communities, resulting in the kind of hybrid, mixed culture that we can find in Macau, for example. In Juan Gil's estimation, Chinese and Spanish peoples managed to live by necessity, for no other reason than economic self-interest.

A Summary of the Main Events
----------------------------

One of the three main contemporary accounts of the episode that have survived does mention Nicolas Iquan (the name by which the Portuguese and Spanish referred to Zheng Zhilong) as a conspirator in the uprising. However, the automatic connection between lack of trade and rebellion is problematic. For one thing, all three of the main sources acknowledge that the revolt did not originate in the Parian of Manila, where most of the Chinese merchants and workers of the city resided. The insurrection started in Calamba, situated to the south of Manila, in Laguna de Bay. The governor Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera wanted to drain and cultivate a strip of land belonging to the city. The purpose was to shore up the supply of rice and other edibles for the military garrison of Manila and its surroundings, thus saving the royal treasury of a considerable expense.

Calamba was located on a marshy plain, infested with mosquitoes. It was a breeding ground for infections and illnesses, and for this reason the plans to exploit the land, concocted by the governor Nino de Tavora in the late 1620s, never took off. Corcuera, however, was determined to increase the income of the royal treasury, often “with more enthusiasm than wisdom,” as one source informs us. He decided to use forced labour in order to put the land into operation. Corcuera ordered the local authorities (*alcaldes mayores*) of villages around Manila to round up the resident Chinese and send them to Calamba, where the *alcalde* Luis Arias de Mora would organize and carry out the project of cultivation. About two thousand Chinese farmers and agrarian workers, as well as stone masons, were dislodged from their places of residence and occupations, and were compelled to toil in the infested marshes around Laguna de Bay, with little or no pay. The terrible working conditions and the harsh treatment by Spanish overseers caused high rates of mortality. To top it off, this agrarian venture was never profitable, due to the low price of rice. The anonymous Jesuit who wrote the *Subcesos de las Islas Filipinas desde agosto de 1639 hasta el de 1640* gave us a succinct but cogent interpretation of the uprising that paid little mind to Pedro de Quiroga or traders in the Parian:

>   Sebastian (Hurtado de Corcuera), desiring to increase his Majesty’s treasury, put a great number of Chinese farmers in some big plane, irrigated and made fertile by rivers, and it is called Calamba. Many of these Chinese were forced and against their will. Over the last few months many fell sick, and they say more than three hundred died, so they were even more desperate, and it is known how unhealthy the place is. The time to pay the licence came, which is more than 25 pesos for each one. They (the *sangleys*) were compelled to pay. They had no money, so they have burst into this uprising.

>   *El señor D. Sebastian, deseoso de que la hacienda de su Magestad crezca, metio gran numero de labradores chinos en unas grandes llanadas que las riegan y hacen fertile algunos rios y se llaman Calamba. muchos destos fueron forzados y contra su voluntad. Cayeron los meses pasados muchos enfermos, y dicen murieron dellos mas de 300, con que se desesperaron mas, y conocidamente es malsano el temple. Llego el tiempo de la licencia y terrazgo, que pasa de 25 pesos cada uno. Apretaronles para la paga. No se hallaron con caudal, con que an venido a reventar en este alzamiento.* 

In short, the sources indicate that the uprising was caused not by declining trade, but by increased fiscal pressure and demands of forced labour. Taken to Calamba and compelled to work in an unprofitable undertaking, these *sangleys* were unable to procure the money to cover the high cost of residential licenses and other taxes. We have no documents indicating that the same situation was being reproduced in the Parian of Manila, although it is likely. However, not every Chinese inhabitant of the Philippines was a merchant, and not every Sangley merchant was a permanent resident in the city. In fact, November, when the “rebellion” started, was a low season in Manila’s cycle of trade, which was at its most active from late February or March, when the *sampan* merchants arrived from China and Taiwan, to July, when the galleons departed. In order to arrive at a convincing explanation of the 1639 conflict, as well as to gauge its impact on trade during the subsequent period, we need to analyze carefully the internal composition of the Sangley community, underscoring the differences in wealth and status that underpinned the organization of Chinese society in the Philippines. To put it simply, while the obstruction of the galleon trade likely affected every citizen and resident in Manila and its environs, some groups and individuals were more vulnerable than others, and they were those in the more precarious position that had less to lose, and therefore were more likely to react against Spanish abuse.

Lack of sources makes difficult to clearly illustrate this point, but based on the partial evidence that we have, it seems clear to me that the destruction of Manila’s Parian and the ensuing indiscriminate massacre of Chinese inhabitants occurred as a result, not of a Sangley act of aggression, but of a pre-emptive Spanish attack after the agrarian revolt reached dangerous proportions. All three of the documents mentioned before follow the same outline. After killing the *alcade mayor* Luis Arias de Mora and some other Spaniards, around two thousand Chinese marched towards Manila, increasing their numbers as they went along, convincing or forcing other *sangleys* to join them in their advance. Hounded by Spanish and Filipino forces, the insurrects reached Santa Cruz, on the opposite side of the river Passig from Manila. Santa Cruz was a major Chinese settlement, and when most of the *sangleys* joined the uprising, the situation reached its utmost point of tension.

The sources diverge here in their interpretation, with the *Relacion de la Real Academia* asserting that the Chinese of the Parian dealt the first blow, killing some Spaniards and mulattoes and attempting to cross the river in order to reach the main group of Sangley insurrects. The rest of the sources, however, coincide in an alternative version. The Parian was under relative calm, when about five hundred *sangleys* from Santa Cruz crossed the Passig intending to rouse the population of the Parian. When Corcuera observed this development, fearing that the overwhelming advantage in numbers of the *sangleys* would surpass the defences of Manila, he commanded the artillery to fire upon the Chinese quarter, which quickly burned and was reduced to rubble. A wholesale slaughter then took place in Intramuros, where many Chinese were employed by the Spanish.

After these events, the situation was brought under relative control in Manila, but the remaining group of rebels continued to march towards the north, probably in search of an escape through the port of Nueva Segovia, in the province of Cagayan. They were cut off by a company of Spanish and Pampanga soldiers, and then the *sangleys* veered to the east. Harassed from all sides, greatly reduced in number and weakened by four months of continuous war, the rebel group had little chance of success left. More than seven thousand Chinese surrendered to the Spanish authorities and were granted a pardon, although two thousand of them died shortly due to “wounds and exhaustion.”

Contested Spaces: The Parián and Binondo after the Revolt
---------------------------------------------------------

On March of 1640, after four months of continuous war, the Jesuit priest xxx and General Jerónimo Enríquez managed to negotiate the rendition of the 7,000 starved and weary troops that remained from the tens of thousands that had originally taken up arms against the regime. The Spanish soldiers formed a double column, through which the were obliged to pass and throw away their weapons. After encamping in the parade-ground of Bagumbaya, the repressing forces and the defeated rebels marched through the city:

>   In the vanguard went Captain Juan Fiallo with the cavalry, to the sound of trumpets; next some companies of Pampango infantry, those of the Cagayan Indians, the Zambal archers, and the Indians who carried javelins and shields in the battalion. Next came all the Sangley forces, and in the rearguard the Spanish infantry, with the master-of-camp. The halberdiers of the governor followed, and in their midst was one on horseback, who carried as a standard the image of the blessed Christ from Antipolo, mounted on a staff. Last of all came the governor, accompanied by his suite, and by many volunteer horsemen who had gone to the war.

The ceremonial parade crossed the city through San Antón street, then passed the bridge towards Tondo, on the other side of the Pasig River, where the Governor had chosen to relocate the Parián de los Sangleyes. The new site was surrounded on all sides by a wooden stockade, from which the place took the name which bears to this day: Estacada. The enclosure was guarded by two companies of Pampango soldiers. Five years later, the Parián returned to its original location, and another ceremony marked the appropriation of the same space a by specific legal body known as the Común de los Sangleyes Cristianos y Mestizos de Sangley.

In this section, I delve into the thorny issue of colonial segregation and the making and remaking of urban space, questioning the narrow focus on the agency of Spanish authorities as the engineers of Manila’s built form and ethnic distribution. The power invested in the imperial agents was indeed a crucial factor, but it was expressed on the production of urban space by way of constant negotiation and compromise regarding boundaries and the proper place of communities. Moreover, the Spanish did not form a cohesive and unified camp, but rather encompassed a variety of institutional bodies with diverging interests. The adjudication of jurisdictional oversight and redistribution of rents which resulted from it was a hotly disputed affair, which had a direct effect on the application of policies regarding the configuration of urban space.

### Segregation and the Formation of Urban Communities

A theoretical and historiographical appraisal of the issue of segregation Main point: the spatialization of ethnic communities has been approached from a top-down perspective, as the imposition of colonial order. We need to complement this perspective with an examination of other processes of community formation, which trascend and transgress the spatial boundaries set up in the colonial legislation. These were a normative ideal, applied flexibly and intermittently, forming a contested field of competing priorities rather than a uniform, concerted action by a single-minded colonial centre. This does not aim to invalidate or diminish the degree of oppression motivated by perceived cultural difference or danger; instead I seek to arrive at a more nuanced

### The Relocation of the Parián and its Discontents

The razing of the Parian costed the city an enormous amount of money (in some contemporary estimations up to 5 million pesos, although this number is probably exaggerated). Governor Corcuera was not one to let a crisis go to waste, and he took advantage of the rebellion’s messy aftermath to relocate the Parian to the other side of the Pasig River, on the town of Baybay. The objective of the governor was to further isolate the Chinese residents, building a wall around the market and establishing a permanent guard of two military companies, inspired, in his own words “by the Jewish ghettos of Alexandria and Rome.” The relocation was seen by many in Manila as a misguided, self-interested decision, and objections were soon put forward. The *procurador* of Manila, (representative of the city before the court of Madrid) Juan Grau de Monfalcón, backed by the *Cabildo* (council house), protested the move in a letter to the king, arguing the new Parian was out of the reach of the artillery. He also pointed out that the very isolation of the place could work in favor of the *sangleys* in the event of a new insurrection, because they would have enough time to fortify the compound of the new Parián. Moreover, he advised against the new location on account of its proximity to the sea and remoteness from the city. There were also economic considerations at play: the new location was a “great inconvenience” to the residents of Intramuros, which very went frequently to the Parian in order to purchase products and services. This illustrates the tension created out of the double function of the Parian: a segregated space, which calls for fixity in place and a certain degree of isolation, but also a marketplace and productive center, which required easy access and freedom of movement to function efficiently.

As we can gather, the motivation for Corcuera's plan went beyond concerns about security, and so did the *Cabildo*'s protests. The rents from the Parian's shops and houses was allocated to religious and municipal institutions, and members of the council house, and Corcuera wished to change the terms of this redistribution of rents in order to benefit his allies in the city. This, of course, roused the opposition of those affected (the city council, the Audiencia, the religious orders). The *procurador* Juan Grau de Monfalcón, backed by the *Cabildo* (council house), protested the relocation in a letter to the king, arguing the new Parian was out of the reach of the artillery. He also pointed out that the very isolation of the place could work in favour of the *sangleys* in the event of a new insurrection, because they would have enough time to barricade and fortify the compound of the new Parián. Most of all, he advised against the new location on account of its proximity to the sea and remoteness from the city. This had not just military consequences: it represented a “great inconvenience” to the residents of Intramuros, which very often went (or sent their servants and slaves) to the Parian in order to purchase products and services. In short, changing the site of the Parián to the other side of the river increased considerably the time and money spent in everyday shopping.[^5]

[^5]: AGI FILIPINAS 28, N. 25 “Memorial de Juan Grau de Monfalcón”

By the time the royal answer to the letter of Juan Grau arrived to Manila, the new Parian was already up and running. This *real cédula* summarised concisely the arguments against the relocation and ordered against the decision of Sebastián de Corcuera:

>   That nobody will want to build in this place on account of being far away from the city and so close to the sea and not subjected to the artillery, because even when it (the Parian) was located under the artillery there have been uprisings, and that it would be easier the *sangleys* to revolt in the place where he (Corcuera) wants to build it because they could be assisted in their treason through the sea, and they could fortify it on account of not being subjected to the artillery like it is in the Parian that was positioned closer to the city. [^6]

[^6]: Que nadie querrá fabricar en el dicho sitio por estar lejos de la ciudad y tan cercano a la mar y no sujeto a la artilleria, pues estando fundado debajo de ella no han estado libres de los alsamientos y que vendrían a tener más comodidad los sangleyes quando se quisiesen lebantar en el lugar donde pretende fundarle por poder ser socorridos en sus traiciones por la mar y poderle fortificar por no tener la sujecion de la artilleria como la tienen en el parian que estava fundado cerca de la ciudad. AGI FILIPINAS 62, N.1 “Cédula real para la reedificación del Parián, de 24 de octubre de 1642”

The new governor, Diego Fajardo, concurred with Grau de Monfalcón. The new site of the Parián was considerably weaker from a military perspective. The old location was “all surrounded by streams (*esteros*), under the artillery and it was of small circumference.” He directed the construction of a new market in its accustomed location, giving detailed instructions for its layout in order to facilitate the repression in case of a new flare up in the hostilities between Chinese and Spanish. He emphasised the need to build straight, ample roads on the Parian “so the artillery can sweep easily any kind turmoil.”[^7]

[^7]: AGI FILIPINAS 62, N.1, “Auto del governador para la reedificación del Parián del 19de Enero de 1645”

The motivations of Corcuera's plan went beyond concerns for security, and so did the *Cabildo*'s protests. The renting of the Parian's stores was allocated to different corporations and members of the council house, and Corcuera was trying to change the composition of the renters to benefit his allies in the city. This and other sources of revenue related to Chinese residents and visitors (such as license of residence for the *sangleys*, impositions on the gambling and the celebration of Chinese festivities, taxes on offices held by *sangleys* and mestizos, and of course taxes on trade like the *almojarifazgo*) were essential for both the royal and municipal treasuries. Some of these contributions were directly related to the control and restriction of mobility, like the fines imposed on Chinese residents that left the Parian at night.[^8] The political economy of social and spatial control is a fascinating aspect of the historical problem I advanced in this paper, as are the ambiguities introduced by the increase in miscegenation and conversion during the 17th century. This document illustrates a clear pattern in the discourses and practices of the Spanish colonial authorities, showing that often they sought to solve social problems of intercultural conflict through spatial control and restrictions of movement.

[^8]: Juan Gil, Los Chinos en Manila, siglos XVI y XVII. 675-677.

I will focus on a memorial written by the Dominican Vittorio Ricci, supporting a project to expel all the non-Christian Chinese from the Philippine islands. It is a very rich document of about 24 pages. It expresses a very negative view of the Chinese of Manila, hammering down one point: the *sangleys* were a polluting influence that contaminated the religious space of the Philippines, perverting the Filipinos (mainly Tagalo, Pampanga and Visayan) with their innumerable vices. In his view, the non-Christian Chinese should be allowed only for trade, and the crafts and services they provide should be passed to *mestizos de Sangley* and natives of the islands. In a certain way, Ricci and the supporters of expulsion wanted to have their cake and eat it too: maintain the Galleon trade while completely changing the social configuration of the city. An interesting aspect of this source is frequent references to the expulsions of Jews and Moriscos from Spain in 1492 and 1611, respectively. This method of dealing with "unholy" elements is, in a way, an extension of the policies of segregation. The presence of these set of attitudes and practices in the Philippines show their transmission from Spain by way of the Americas, maintaining a similar basic structure that is adapted to new circumstances: in the setting of the Philippines, the *sangleys* are equated with Jews and Moors, while the wide variety of Filipino sociolinguistic and ethnic groups are all referred to as Indians.

Interestingly, some sources also point to China and Japan as examples of how to deal with foreigners. In the words of Ricci: “It is notable the trust of the generous Spanish nation, but it should not be so extended that one day we will find ourselves in jeopardy. We see just the opposite in China, where is so great the fear of foreigners that they dont allow them in any way, and if in some occasion a missionary manages to enter, they keep him under a tight watch, as if he would swallow the empire whole.” Some pages after he says about Japan: “we should deal with Chinese as the Japanese do, they admit their commerce only in a designated place, and they count them both when they enter and when they leave, not allowing a single one of the Chinese stay.”

Later on, Ricci makes another very interesting comment that is worth quoting in full:

>   There is no place secluded enough that the Sangley has not infiltrated, so they know the land and have more news about it that the Spanish, who are rulers of these islands.(...) A further inconvenience is that by letting them (the Chinese) enter in the city and the houses they know everything that in them happens, because they talk with servants and blacks and in this way learn about every good and bad thing that comes about (...) A Christian Sangley told a missionary settled in China: Father, I am an old hound of Manila, and I know that the Spanish women are all a bunch of (I dont utter the word because it is dishonest and its meaning can be understood). And the missionary asked very upset: how you say that, being Christian? Precisely because I am Christian, responded the *sangley*, I have entered in every house there is in Manila. (…) It is not convenient that they be allowed to communicate or see our houses or our customs.[^9]

[^9]: AGI FILIPINAS 330, L.4, 42v44r.

This passage shows that the concerns about the unimpeded mobility of the Chinese population went beyond military security or even religious virtue, but expresses a certain fear that foreign, unholy elements would penetrate and pollute the intimate space of the houses, and therefore, the lives of the Spanish. The control of macro-mobility, of extensive movements of migration and trade, is coupled here with the restriction of what we may call micro-mobility or mobility within the town. It shows also fear of the spread of uncontrolled information in the hands of a perceived enemy.

To conclude, I would say that the perspective outlined here take us in a rather different direction than the one pursued by Dennis O'Flynn and Arturo Giráldez. Even though Flynn and Giráldez made Manila the central pivot of their historical revision of early modern globalization, by focusing on creation of a world market for silver, the question of how the city came to be and how it evolved over the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was mostly passed by. Of course, this is not a shortcoming of their work but a deliberate decision to frame their research in world historical terms, emphasizing planetary connections and broad patterns of historical evolution. However, it may give the impression that Manila was a sort of black box, simply facilitating the exchange. Instead, I would suggest we direct our gaze to the frictions and conflicts, and their expression in urban patterns, which accompanied the formation of the Mexico-Manila-China trade complex. By shifting the focus from the macro-mobility of large-scale, *long durče* processes of intercontinental exchange to the management of micro-mobility and social relations in an urban setting, we can open a window into the social morphology of cities on which global trade networks were built. In short, global cities in the Early Modern should be understood not just as links in a global circulation process, but also as complex systems of filters and as arrangement of local boundaries that constrained the possibilities and defined the nature of a given interaction. The limits of early modern globalization are not only technological or economic, but also social: in the case of Manila, this refers to the difficulty of fitting new networks of mobility into existing conceptions of what a "moral society", a political republic, and a religious community should look like.

### Reclaiming space, signifying possession: the 1645 petition of the Común de los Cristianos Sangleyes y Mestizos de Sangley

Who were evicted from Baybay in 1640 in order to make room for the new Parian. In 1645, after Hurtado de Corcuera left his position (and was actually indicted and jailed for numerous acts of corruption), the leaders of *común de los cristianos sangleys y mestizos de sangley* sent a petition to the new governor, Diego de Fajardo, to reclaim their customary site of residence. The petition was accompanied by a sketch of Baybay, drawn in 1645 but copied from an earlier map produced in 1602, which is the earliest graphic representation of Manila that I am aware of.

We will look at this map with more detail in a moment, but first I would like to highlight the most salient elements of this petition, and call attention to the way that the claiming and appropriation of space was justified and carried out under the institutional framework of the Hispanic Monarchy. The case put forward by the *mestizos de sangley*, supported by the declaration of witnesses, hinged on two main factors: 1) Precedence in occupation, proven by the sworn statements of members of the former Tagalog royalty. 2) Improvement and transformation of the environment by the *mestizos de sangley.* 

The choice of witnesses is revelatory in itself. A first petition elevated to the Audiencia (royal court) was turned down, because, according to the royal attorney, the petitioners lacked written records of ownership. The *mestizo* leaders then presented the testimony of six witnesses, chosen because of their old age and standing in Tagalog, Chinese and Spanish society. The first witness is Don Agustín Managui, son of Lacandola, former King of Manila, who said was about 15 years old when the Spanish arrived to the Philippines.

Don Agustin declared that: “He heard his father and grandfather say that they granted said place of Baybay long ago to these *sangleys* so they may live in it, and originally was a very small piece of land.”

Further down, he supports the allegation that this particular group of *sangleys* had peacefully and customarily occupied the land of Baybay, without opposition of the native Tagalog population. He argues that: *“He is certain that nobody contradicted their possession, nor the natives of the land or anybody else, because the only one who could rightly challenge it was this witness, as the owner and successor to the lands of Manila, which belonged to this father and grandfather before the arrival of the Spanish.”*

This statement highlights the continuity of certain forms of native Tagalog authority in the allocation of space, even after the conquest of the Philippines, alerting us to the fact that 1571, much like 1492, was not a clean break from the past.

Another witness is Francisco Bayon, who is described as a citizen of Manila and a Spaniard, but also a grandson of the King of Cebu and the son of the first Spanish man who married a woman from the native nobility. He declares that: “he remembers seeing that formerly the place of Baybay was not as broad, as it was covered with seawater.””

Pedro de Vera, who was head of the Sangley builder’s guild and *alarife* (master builder) of Manila, expanded on this matter:

“Due to the sea-gales the terrain of the site facing the beach was growing, and he also observed in different times that the *mestizos* built terraces in some of the lowlands, with what, in time, its settlement developed.”

“And he expelled from the place *cafres*, Spaniards, Sangley fishers, Blacks and others, giving them to understand that said piece of land belonged to the commons on the Christian *sangleys* and Mestizos de *sangleys*”

“And with those expelled, he commanded the said lieutenants and sergeant-majors to enter inside and open and close doors and windows, and lift stones from the ground, and tear out grass and disperse in signal of true, juridical and royal possession.”

As we have seen, the petition frames the relocation of the Parián as an unlawful and arbitrary exercise of power, which disrupted the legitimate and peaceful occupation of Baybay. The symbolic performance of spatial re-appropriation is tied to the juridical performance of representation, within the institutional framework of the Hispanic Monarchy. In this manner, a group of people defines itself and is acknowledged as a particular and distinct social body, lawfully claiming its proper place within the urban landscape. In addition, this act appropriation involves the exclusion of others from said place, through the enforcement of spatial boundaries.
