
# The Regime of Manuel Estacio Venegas (1644-1651): A Crisis of Governance

## Introduction

On 18 November of 1648, the captain Diego de Hinojosa y Villavicencio appeared before Gerónimo de Camargo, fiscal of the Council of the Indies in Madrid. In his declaration, Diego de Hinojosa claimed that he had urgent news to relay to the King about the dire state of the Philippine Islands. The authorities in Madrid had not received news from the Philippines in several years. Due to the blockade established by a large Dutch fleet on the bay of Manila during the years of 1646 and 1647, contact between Mexico and the Philippines had been cut. There was justified fear that the Philippine colony had been lost to the VOC, or perhaps that the Chinese had risen up again and overrun the defenses of Manila. Out of a sense of duty to the king, Hinojosa declared, he took upon himself to inform the Court of the grave danger besieging the Philippine colony. He was stationed at the time at the Spanish garrison of Ternate, and in October of 1647 he crossed to the nearby island of Tidore. Once there he embarked on a Danish ship on route to Batavia. As he put it in his declaration, Hinojosa sought the refuge of the VOC authorities, who took pity on him seeing the wretched state of his person. The news of the Peace of Munster between the Hispanic Monarchy and the Dutch Republic had by then reached Batavia, and the officials of the VOC gave Hinojosa passage to Europe on one of their ships. He arrived in Holland nine months later, with no money or belongings to his name, and he begged for charity on his voyage to Spain, which took him another three months. Diego de Hinojosa finally reached the court of Madrid more than a year after leaving the Molucca Islands. 

At first glance, it would seem that Diego de Hinojosa had left his military post without authorization and deserted to the enemy, a very serious crime against the Crown. Gerónimo Camargo was thus understandably suspicious of the actions and motivations of the captain. At that time, dozens of soldiers of the Ternate *presidio* were defecting to the Dutch, taking with them highly sensitive information regarding the readiness of the Spanish defences in the Moluccas and Manila. The Council sent a petition for more detailed information to the governor of the Philippines, in order to inquire about Diego de Hinojosa and his traveling companion, Cristóbal Galindo. The response, quite damning to Hinojosa and Galindo, took more than four years to arrive. In the meantime, Hinojosa was at pains to prove that his reliance on the enemies of the Crown was just a necessary expedient to return to Spain, and did not entail a betrayal to the King. He argued that he had been unjustly banished by the governor to the Ternate *presidio.* Fearing for his life and concerned about the survival of the Spanish colony in the Philippines, he saw no option but to escape Ternate and warn the King of the untenable situation that he witnessed in Manila.

Diego de Hinojosa was supposedly banished because he said in public that the real ruler of the Philippines was not the governor, Don Diego de Fajardo, but instead his *valido*, the sergeant-major Manuel Estacio Venegas. Hinojosa's account paints a picture of a city torn asunder by factional conflict, with a governor in name only held in thrall by his right-hand man. Hinojosa claimed that it was public knowledge in the Islands that Manuel Estacio Venegas thoroughly controlled and manipulated Diego de Fajardo, going so far as to render him “unable to govern through potions and poisonous herbs” (*incapaz de gobernar con bebidas y hierbas venenosas*). Estacio used his influence over the governor to establish an “unbounded tyranny” (*desmedida tiranía*) over the city, accumulating all the major offices and monopolizing the commerce with New Spain. Manuel Estacio, after having secured the backing of governor Fajardo, moved against his enemies and potential rivals with a vengeance, using the threat of banishment, jail and even murder to eliminate any opposition. Starting with Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera, all the way down to Corcuera's family and friends, his business partners and military colleagues, servants, and slaves, more than a hundred and fifty people were forcibly removed from the political scene during the extremely harsh *juicio de residencia* of the departing governor. Some people were imprisoned for years on end, others were sent to the galleys, whipped and publicly shamed, and in some cases hanged at the gallows set up in the *plaza de armas* of the Philippine capital.

When Diego de Hinojosa escaped in 1648, Manuel Estacio Venegas was still at the peak of his power. Five years later, Don Sabiniano Manrique de Lara replaced Diego de Fajardo as the governor and captain-general of the Philippines. The scene he describes in his first dispatches to the governor is remarkably similar to Hinojosa's, but in this case, it was Manuel Estacio Venegas who was imprisoned, as well as his family, servants, and slaves. Dozens of Estacio's associates were placed in jail while a long and protracted investigation was carried out regarding the corruption and abuses of the former *valido* of the governor. This new cycle of violence and retribution was kicked off in September of 1651, when Diego de Fajardo had a change of heart about the actions and character of Manuel Estacio, and relied on a new *valido*, Don Juan de Zarauz, to wrest power from Estacio's hands and wipe out his faction by whatever means necessary.

Institutional conflict and internal strife were hardly new in the history of Spanish Manila, but rather the normal state of affairs since the city was founded in 1571. The clashes between the governor, the mendicant orders, the Audiencia, and the municipal council, were part of and parcel of the city's governance. Although the historiography about the Philippines (and in general the Hispanic Monarchy) has seen this state of permanent conflict as a sign of inefficiency and political backwardness, it can be argued that it provided safeguards against an excessive concentration of power in the hands of a single person or institution. From this perspective, the jurisdictional fragmentation and institutional diversity that characterized the Hispanic Monarchy was a prerequisite as well as the result of a multilayered process of negotiation among a variety of stakeholders, with the monarchical authority acting as arbiter, mediator, and final adjudicator, rather than an all-powerful, absolutist ruler.

The negotiated character of the Spanish empire, however, also entailed constant competition between different elite groups, within specific cities or regions, but also at a much broader scale. This competition for power, prominence and wealth were usually carried out through relatively peaceful means, but in some cases could erupt in vicious and violent confrontations that could even endanger the very sustainability of the imperial project. There is little doubt that the Philippines after the governorship of Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera presents a prime example of this danger. The *juicio de residencia* of Sebastián de Corcuera and the subsequent regime of Manuel Estacio Venegas fundamentally transformed how the political game was played in Manila, provoking an acute level of political instability that lingered, with ebbs and flows, for the remainder of the 17th century and beyond. The governorship of Sabiniano Manrique de Lara (1653-1663) was, by and large, a time of relative union among the ruling elite of Manila when the shared interests of the colony's stakeholders prevailed over the conflicting tendencies still lurking under the surface. By contrast, the next governor, Diego de Salcedo (1663-1668), was subjected to an inquisitorial process for heresy and collaboration with the Dutch, forcibly removed from office and thrown in prison. Salcedo died while traveling to New Spain to face the inquisitorial charges A captain of the army, Juan Peña Bonifaz, backed by Paternina et al. took over the government by means of a military coup in 1668, throwing the municipal, military and religious administration into disarray.

In this chapter, I will explore how during the turbulent years of the mid-17th century, the controversial and divisive rule of Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera morphed into a state of near civil war during his *juicio de residencia*, and how Manuel Estacio Venegas used a variety of political tactics to concentrate power on him and his allies. The use of violence and coercion (in the form of jail, banishment, torture, and murder) became an ordinary recourse, but physical force would not have been sufficient in and of itself to capture the levers of power as completely as he did. The regime of Manuel Estacio Venegas was founded just as much in the control of information as it was in the control of bodies: one element supported the other. His progressive takeover of virtually all the key institutions of governance allowed him to legitimize his actions through a shrewd manipulation of the documentary process. Manuel Estacio's strategy seems to have been to filter and shape how information was inscribed on the official documentation.

\- how information moved within Manila

\- what kind of news reached the city

\- what kind of news left to other posts in the Philippines and beyond, to Mexico and Madrid.

In this way, Manuel Estacio and his faction were able to silence opposition and legitimize, for a time at least, their takeover of government.

Illustrate with reference to Hinojosa

Furthermore, the combined use of information control and spatial control over bodies (jail and banishment) allowed the faction in power to create and maintain a broad portfolio of earnings (long-distance trade, fiscal fraud, public auctions, gambling, extortion). in the context of Philippine historiography, the attention paid to commerce and smuggling in the Manila Galleon has not seen a corresponding interest in how royal officials combined contraband with other illicit activities, such as extortion to Chinese shop-owners or control of public auctions. The governors and closest collaborators, in particular, were in a privileged position to build a “portfolio” of rents that were then distributed among the allies and clients of the faction’s leader, that were then spent in movable wealth (jewels and merchant products) and social capital. bribes and favours in Mexico, Sevilla, and Madrid). The case of Manuel Estacio is interesting because we see at a very specific level of detail that the business of colonial power in Manila went far beyond the trans-Pacific trade. Guided by a complex but revealing source such as the *juicios de residencia*, we can see the confluence and mutual interdependence of external trade, military authority, municipal politics and even moral order; not as separate domains, but rather in movement, in a dynamic interrelation.

My purpose in revisiting the career and times of Manuel Estacio de Venegas is not to condemn or vindicate him, but rather to investigate the mechanisms of colonial power that underpinned both his rise and precipitous fall. Redefinition of the concept of elite group and the political scene. Juicios de residencia as a window into society.


### Sources



## A Contentious Career: Versions of Manuel Estacio's Life

Virtually every book dedicated to the history of the Philippines during the 17th century dwells, however briefly, on the figure of Manuel Estacio de Venegas. The topic is usually glossed over with concisely, a few lines describing his rise to power, thanks to a close relationship with the governor-general Diego Fajardo Chacón (1644-1653), the terrible abuses he committed as the favourite and right hand of the governor*,* and finally his abrupt fall from grace in 1651. Estacio Venegas has become one the most infamous characters that populate the colonial imaginary of Philippine history. Surprisingly, there is not a single monograph or article that gives a full-fledged account of Manuel Estacio Venegas’ time as *de facto* ruler of Manila. His name lives on mainly as a synonym for governmental corruption and unabashed greed; a paradigmatic case of institutional capture for private gain. Through the combination of illicit trade, fiscal fraud, and extortion, Manuel Estacio Venegas was able to enrich himself and his family, accruing an extraordinary amount of wealth. According to Immaculada Alva Rodríguez, by 1650 he was the most affluent man in the Philippine Islands, with a personal fortune valued at more than 400,000 pesos. In the meantime, he built the grandest, most sumptuous mansion in *Intramuros*, which became the Governor’s residence and office after its sequestration as a result of Estacio’s sentence. How did he achieve this position? Can we trace the trajectory of life as he moved from his native Granada to Mexico and finally Manila? What does his career tell us about the social landscape of the Spanish Empire in the 17th century?

The most striking thing is the importance of the documentary process in the creation and transformation of fluid identities. Here's why:

According the *Diccionario hisórico, geográfico y cultural de Filipinas y el Pacífico* (ed. Leoncio Cabrera), Manuel Estacio Venegas was born in Granada circa 1598. As we will see, his early life before arriving to the Philippines in the late 1625, is shrouded in uncertainty and crossed allegations. Estacio claimed to be the descendant of an upstanding family, known and respected in his hometown as *personas de calidad y servicio* (people of quality and service). Venegas was indeed the surname of the most powerful and influential noble family of Granada, who trace their origin to a prominent Muslim clan that converted to Christianity in 1492. Pedro Bannigas pledged allegiance to the Castilian Crown and was instrumental in facilitating the conquest of the Nazari kingdom of Granada, the last remaining Muslim-ruled territory in the Iberian Peninsula. With the support of the kings Fernando and Isabel, the Granada-Venegas soon became an integral part of the high Castilian nobility. During the 16th century, the main branch of the Venegas family developed an amibitious and shrewd strategy of marital alliances, which allow them to set deep roots and gather a large number of clients in Eastern Andalusia. Minor branches of the Venegas family sprung up all over the kingdom of Granada. Only a few of the noble families of the former Nazari kingdom stayed in in the Iberian Peninsula after the War of Granada, while the Nazari royalty and most of the nobility fled to North Africa. The remaining elite families converted to Christianity, but maintained a certain degree of cohesion, forming what Enrique Soria Mesa calls a "great family", an extended kin with strong social and cultural ties, united by recurrent marital bonds. The Granada-Venegas occupied a central place among them.

One of these prominent *morisco* houses was the Jiménez-Venegas family, to which Manuel Estacio's father, Pedro Jiménez Venegas, belonged. Based on the village of Monachil, the Jiménez-Venegas were rich merchants involved in the silk trade of Granada. Despite their wealth and influence in local society, they not part of the nobility until the 17th century was well advanced. In 1636, Juan Jiménez Venegas el Joven, uncle of Manuel Estacio, presented a genealogy that was accepted and recognized by the *Chancillería Real de Granada* and received an *ejecutoria* bestowing upon him and his descendants the privileges and social recognition of *hidalguía.* In his proof of ancestry, Juan Jiménez Venegas claimed that the Jiménez were an Old Christian noble family from Murcia, come to Granada around 1492 to participate in the conquest, and thereafter establish themselves in Granada. This would seem to prove Manuel Estacio's claim of unimpeachable ancestry, discrediting the accusations of the Audiencia's judge, Francisco Samaniego Tuesta, that he was little more than a *pícaro* (a rascal) without a noble bone in his body. The reality is more complicated. Soria Mesa's research on the *moriscos* of Granada revealed that the practice of usurping surnames was very extended. This was the case with the Jiménez Venegas of Monachil. In 1643, Juan El Joven used this bold but rather expedient stratagem to appropriate a surname similar to his, but of far better extraction. To quote Enrique Soria Mesa: "The major obstacle for this family was derived from descending from the Granada-Venegas through the female line, which deprived them of the social standing and noble treatment enjoyed by their cousins. The ploy used in this case was to invent an origin doubly foreign to their real roots. On the one hand, Old Christians; on the other, Murcian *hidalgos* that supposedly came to southern lands on the occasion of the war against the Nazaris."

This shows the extent to which genealogical information was unreliable in the Early Modern period. Claims of noble and "clean" birth constituted a crucial form of symbolic capital, but one that was very difficult to authenticate. During the 16th and 17th centuries, the concept of *limpieza de sangre* became more and more important. After its origin in 15th century Castile, the concept of purity of blood (that is, the absence of Jewish and Muslim ancestors in one's genealogy tree) turned into an organizing principle of society in terms of exclusion and status. Numerous institutions, such as municipal councils (*cabildos*) and the military orders of Santiago, Alcantara, and Calatrava, made the proof of purity a necessary requisite to hold office. The process of inspection of someone's ancestry, however, was easy to circumvent and manipulate. The investigation was prompted by the person whose origins were investigated, usually because he wanted to apply for a certain position or ask for a sinecure. The procedure consisted mainly of interviews with witnesses, selected from local society because of their age and respectability. Public fame (*pública voz y fama*, to use the formulaic expression) was the central element of proof in the legal proceedings, complemented with genealogies and documents related to family history. In many cases, such as the one mentioned above, the person under investigation would bear the costs incurred in the proceedings, such as travel expenses and transfer of documents, and he could handpick the official in charge of the *probanza*. In this context, it comes as no surprise that bribery of witnesses and documentary fraud were rampant. For example, (xxx)

A genealogical report included by petition of Manuel Estacio in his trial's records serves as a perfect example of the "game of deceits" created around genealogy in the Hispanic Monarchy. As María Elena Martínez points out in her study about *limpieza de sangre* and the *casta* system in New Spain, "the distance between Mexico and Spain, the size of the Spanish American territories, and the migration process (...) facilitated the falsification of names and fabrication of new identities, indeed, the multiplication of genealogical fictions." This genealogical *probanza* gives very different account of the Jiménez Venegas ancestry, complicating the story even further. While Enrique Soria's research points to the Granada Venegas family as the stem of the Jiménez Venegas, this report indicates instead that Manuel Estacio was related to the Venegas Fernández de Córdoba, a separate noble family from Andalusia. These Venegas were not part of the former Nazari nobility, having being in possession of the *señorío* de Luque since the 14th century. The house of Luque supposedly descended from the royal family of Portugal, and was related through marriage to some of the oldest and most prestigious families in Castile.

Estacio gave the power of attorney to his maternal uncle, Alonso Castellón, to carry out the process on July 1643. Alonso Castellón started interviewing witnesses and procuring genealogical records on April 1646, in Granada. Alonso Castellón interviewed Don Egas Venegas Fernández de Córdoba, count of Luque, as well as Fernando de Torres, his steward, and other eminent and respected members of Granada's nobility. Interestingly, the texts of these two declarations are virtually identical. In fact, the declarations of all these witnesses agree on the same points, sometimes word for word, almost to a suspicious degree. Manuel Estacio's grandfather, Juan Jiménez Venegas el Viejo (the Elder), was a blood relation and close companion of Rodrigo Venegas Fernández de Córdoba, and later his sons. Fernando de Torres declared that "he had heard from old and venerable people of much credit and faith that said doctor Venegas the Elder is descendant from the direct male line of the illustrious house and family of the Venegas, of which is head the aforementioned Count of Luque". Torres also mentions that Juan Venegas el Viejo participated in the suppression of the Morisco uprising of 1570, where he was captured and almost killed by the rebels. When he was on the brink of death, Rodrigo Venegas Fernández de Córdoba arrived with a cavalry company and saved him from captivity. Since then, according to Fernando de Torres, Juan el Viejo often said that "he owed his life and his blood to the house of Luque." Juan Jiménez Venegas became a "xxx." In short, one of the main concerns of the report is to establish that the relation between Juan el Viejo and the Counts of Luque was intimate and affectionate. He was not just a distant cousin but a close associate of the family who was allowed in Don Egas' inner circle.

The report then traces the connection between Manuel Estacio and his grandfather, proving that it followed the male line. According to all the witnesses, Juan el Viejo fathered two sons: Juan (called *El Joven*, the Younger) and Pedro, who was conceived out of wedlock. Juan el Viejo, "being a young bachelor, free to marry, had relations with an honest young maiden, free to marry as well, and from said relations she became pregnant." The name Manuel Estacio's grandmother is not revealed, as it was common in the cases that could endanger the reputation of a woman. Pedro Jiménez Venegas, therefore, was a *hijo natural*, but recognized and raised as a legitimate son, which was not at all uncommon in early modern Spain. Juan and Pedro married two sisters, María and Ana Estacio, respectively. From the union of Pedro and Ana, Manuel Estacio Venegas was born, in the year 1606. This date is crucial for the main purpose of the genealogical report, which was to belie the deposition of witnesses that had characterized Manuel Estacio as a person of low extraction and dubious character. It greatly undermined the allegations hurled against Estacio, for the simple reason that

Diego Felipe de Saya, for example, declared that he had known Estacio in Granada, and later in 1606 saw him in Sevilla, working as a *corchete* (assistant) for one of Sevilla's *alguaciles* (constable). It was a position of notorious ill repute, considered fit only for uneducated goons and often related to crime and corruption. They were in charge of physically restraining the detainees; hence the name *corchete*, from the French *crochet*, meaning to hook or grab. Saya also asserted that Estacio "was a servant of the constable, with other his companions, one called Manzanilla, and Juan Ruiz Galera and other called El Marquesillo, and other called Saltavadillos, and other called Portillo, and these *corchetes* lived in the Compás de Sevilla which was the dwelling of such people." The Compás was an infamous neighborhood of Sevilla, site of the *mancebía* (akin to a red light district, where legal prostitution was concentrated) where prostitutes and pimps, thieves and gamblers lived and peddled their trade.

Saya further recalled having being told by Marcos Jiménez around 1640, already in Manila: "Look at this *pícaro* Estacio, me sick of giving him food and clothing in Sevilla and now with all the money he's making he doesn't look after the good men." Another witness, Francisco Vidal Verastegui, confirms Saya's declaration and adds that he saw him "every day passing by the Sierpe street running after the horse of the *alguacil* Galván with the rest of the *corchetes*, his companions, and he remembers one called Manzanilla, who strutted around with buckskin jerkin, that reached to his knees, and breeches and cape of *morisquillo* cloth, and yellow tights with high boots." Manzanilla's description calls to mind the social type of the *rufián*, brilliantly described in Cervantes' Rinconete y Cortadillo. It was common sight in the criminal underworld of 17th century Sevilla, often embroiled in street fights and violent confrontations. Verastegui mentions hearing that Manzanilla and Estacio were implicated in such an encounter in the port of Sevilla with sailors from the *flota de Indias*. He adds that Manuel Estacio must still have some scars left from that encounter, as he was knocked out from several blows to the head and left for dead in an alley, before Manzanilla and other companions rescued him.

Contrast of the two versions

Answer of the fiscal of the case

His enemies portrayed Manuel Estacio as an ambitious upstart, a man of humble origins who climbed the social ladder thanks to deceit and manipulation. As he took power and concentrated the working of the administrative, military and judicial institutions under his purview, the circumstances of his birth and the development of his career became ever more contentious. The aforementioned dictionary follows quite closely a *relación de méritos y servicios* that Estacio sent to the Council of Indies in November of 1649. This printed *relación* and the dossier elaborated in Manila to substantiate its claims offer a more detailed account of Estacio’s supposed feats of arms, but the information about Estacio’s career before he arrived in the Philippines in 1625 is relatively sparse. At that time, he had been enrolled in the royal armada of the Mediterranean for more than ten years, achieving the rank of sergeant. In 1615, we find Estacio as a soldier on the navy led of Luis de Fajardo, Captain-General of the *Armada del Mar Oceano*. Estacio was involved in an encounter with three Dutch hulks near Cape St. Vincent, where Dutch, English and French interlopers often waited for the return of the Sevilla-bound silver fleets. Later on, Manuel Estacio served on the royal galleys of the Mediterranean, being wounded in action in 1623, during a skirmish off the coast of Fuengirola, and again in 1624 while fighting against the Barbary pirates.

There are reasons to be cautious regarding the veracity of this information, coming as it does from Manuel Estacio’s *relación de méritos*. These were documents designed to cast the career of the men who commissioned them under a favourable light, highlighting their illustrious ancestry, bravery, and martial mettle. As MacLeod argues, the main purpose of the *relaciones* was self-promotion, and a high degree of distortion and bias is, therefore, to be expected. One of the charges faced by Venegas in his *juicio de residencia* was precisely having doctored his *relación de méritos*, misrepresenting his experience as a man of arms and lying about his military service. Salvador Gómez Espinosa, *oidor* of the Real Audiencia and the attorney in charge of the judicial process, wrote:

>   The relation of many important services that he said to have done at the service of his majesty are most of them patently false, as shown by the proceedings and certifications of the royal judges that I have presented, whose written testimony I present in eight pages, for the validation of the charge that is put on Manuel Estacio for having articulated and proved in his information of merits and services falsehoods so numerous that he fooled the esteemed governor into awarding to him considerable bounties of military honours and large *encomiendas*, and not being content with this, he wrote said letter to fool the royal council and achieve the validation of his claims.

In a letter to the court complaining about Estacio and decrying the sorry condition of the Philippines, the *fiscal* of the Real Audiencia Francisco Samaniego Tuesta asserted that the lies written by Estacio regarding his military service were but a portion of a larger pattern of falsification of official documents, on which the tyrannical power of Estacio was founded. Samaniego explains that the *valido* of the governor had gained such a tight control on the information flowing out of the islands that the royal court and council of Indies “must still be unaware of how Estacio and his faction have usurped the government” at the time that his letter was written, in 1650. With his characteristic hyperbolic flair, Francisco Samaniego writes: “Not even the birds dare to fly from one island to another without his license.” We will explore in more detail the relation between information, spatial restrictions, and power in the next section.

In all likelihood, Francisco Samaniego was the author of a very interesting and polemical document: *La Relacion y funesta historia del gobierno de D. Diego Fajardo.* In it, Samaniego gives a very different account of Estacio’s trajectory. Manuel Estacio is described as, “according to reliable informants that knew him in Spain, the son of a French man and a Portuguese woman, and from the graft, one can know the origin of the plant”: A not so veiled accusation of suspicious *limpieza de sangre*. Furthermore, far from being an experienced soldier, Estacio moved to the Philippines as a servant of captain Manuel de Torres y Portugal, son of the Conde de Villar, viceroy of Perú from 1585 to 1589. Manuel de Torres gave him the position of *sargento mayor*, but after the captain was “reformed” (that is, relieved from active duty) upon arrival to the Philippines, Estacio became just a private citizen at the service of this Manuel de Torres, with no military rank. The *Relación y funesta historia* goes on to chart Estacio’s advancements not as based on martial excellence and dedication to the Crown, as his account of *méritos y servicios* does, but rather trading acumen and personal service to powerful patrons. He took the job of *ropavejero*, buying from textiles in public auctions and reselling them for meager profits to the poorer sector of Spanish society. Having amassed a little capital (*caudalejo*) and developed relationships with prominent personalities in Manila’s society, he obtained the office of *alferez de vagabundos extranjeros de la ciudad:* ensign of foreign vagabonds, which according to the *funesta historia* was granted only to people of little importance (*personas de poca monta*).

Whatever the quality of his service to the Crown and social origin, by 1635 Manuel Estacio Venegas had established himself as a player in both Manila’s trade and politics. The *relación* pinpoints Estacio’s big break in the world of Manila’s municipal politics when he was named the captain of a galleon bound to New Spain. Estacio was now qualified to receive a *boleta* and secure space in the cargo of the *Nao de China*. The officials and crew of the Manila Galleon not only traded on their own account. They also acted as factors for other merchants and, most importantly, they used their responsibilities in the logistical organization of the galleons to hide and deliver smuggled goods to Acapulco, and silver in the return voyage to the Philippines. In a very restricted but enormously profitable enterprise such as the trans-Pacific route, administrative and military offices were often valued to the extent that they provided opportunities to trade *fuera de registro*; that is, without declaring cargo to the fiscal authorities. Conversely, the profits of the Galleon route were re-invested by Manila’s residents on the purchase of a variety of municipal posts, in order to facilitate and sustain the illicit networks of trade that comprised much of the trans-Pacific economic movement.

Manuel Estacio certainly fits into this pattern. His increasing wealth brought with it more political and military responsibilities, as well as an enhanced social position within the Spanish ruling elite. In 1633, he purchased the position of *regidor*, thus entering the council house. In 1634, he married María de Perona, daughter of Juana Soler and Fernando López de Perona, who was deeply involved in the Acapulco trade. López de Perona had acted as agent for some of the most important merchants in Mexico City and occupied the post of *regidor* and *alcalde mayor* in several occasions. In 1624, he was elected by the council house to represent the interests of Manila´s merchant community before the Mexican consulate. In Estacio’s *Probanzas para la Relacion de servicios*, Perona claims to have been impoverished by his services to the Crown in the Philippines, and thus asks for compensation from the Crown in the form of royal favour to his son-in-law. A second daughter of the Perona family married the captain Lope de Colindres, who became one of Estacio’s main allies during the 1640s and 1650s. Pedro Quintero, Miguel Fernandez Maroto, Francisco de Larrea and Manuel Suarez de Olivera, were also indirectly related to the Venegas-Perona family.

How Estacio became the valido of the governor


## Interiores Dolencias y Clandestinas Tragedias: Factionalism and Social Conflict

Although Manila and Macau share close similarities due to a common Iberian background and economic positioning in Maritime Asia (articulation of the exchange between Chinese silk and the silver empires of Japan and Spanish America), they present striking differences in their inner political dynamics, caused to a significant degree by a single but powerful discrepancy. Manila had a permanent governor, while Macau did not until 1623 when the figure *capitao geral* was introduced in substitution of the *capitao mor* of the Japanese trade route. The governor of the Philippine islands was named by the king under the advice of the Council of Indies, and the average term of service was around 4 to 6 years. The governor concentrated within his purview a number of functions. He was the commander of the *real tercio* of Manila, having in principle absolute power in military matters. He was also in charge of the royal finances, as well as having a judicial role as President of the Royal Audiencia. He was responsible for maintaining order and

Macau, on the other hand, was more free from the Crown

The crucial point here is not whether the central authorities were more intrusive and “absolutist” in the case of the Philippines. The viceroy of New Spain, as well as the Council of Indies and Casa de la Contratacion in Seville, were unable to impose an effective oversight, let alone absolute control, over the policies of officials acting thousands of miles away across the Pacific Ocean. In practice, the Spanish Empire was ruled by negotiation and compromise.

The institution of the *gobernador y capitán general* introduced a variable in the conflict between elite factions that was mostly absent in Macau. A newly appointed governor of the Spanish Philippines often arrived in Manila lacking an accurate understanding of the political situation and social customs predominant in his new post. He was suddenly dropped, so to speak, on a field of power relations that was often hostile and opaque, mired in jurisdictional and factional conflict, and therefore difficult to navigate in the best of circumstances. The arrival of a governor and his extended retinue periodically changed the nature of the field, sometimes in a rather abrupt manner. It is unsurprising then that the transition period from governor to governor was almost always marked by upheaval and drastic rearrangements. The degree of disruption and violence markedly increased in the period under study (1630-1660), due to the challenges posed by the economic depression and military setbacks of the 1630s and 1640s, which made the succession of governors all the more dangerous and unpredictable.

As Antoni Picazo Muntaner cogently explains in a series of article about governors Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera (1635-1643), Diego de Salcedo (1663-1668) and Juan de Vargas (1678-1684), the long distance separating the Philippines from the viceroy of New Spain and, even further, the Council of Indies, made virtually impossible to hold these officials accountable for corrupt activities. For most intents and purposes, during his tenure, the governor was an independent ruler and was often taken as such by other polities in the region. For example, in the correspondence between Koxinga and Manrique Lara, as well as the diplomatic dealings with the Chinese imperial officials after 1603. The wide range of functions and capabilities at the disposal of the governor led to the creation of “hidden networks of power” centred around the figure of the governor, who handed the most important administrative and military posts in the colony to his relatives, servants and associates[^1], in order to control the redistribution of trade profits in a manner beneficial to his interests.

[^1]: The expression *Parientes, criados y allegados* or a variation of thereof appears over and over in the documentation. See: xxx

This did not mean, however, that the governor had free rein to act in whatever manner he pleased. In fact, his actions were tightly constrained by custom and tradition. Political ethos in the Early Modern period was marked by resistance to change and innovation in the socio-political order. Often this resistance clashed with the need to introduce wide-ranging reforms in the face of acute financial and military challenges, as the Hispanic Monarchy in general, and particularly the Philippine colony, faced around the middle of the 17th century. More crucially, governors had to face the opposition of local power-holders and established interest groups which resisted the change of the guard. The conflicts between the Royal Audiencia and the governor were constant, as Cunningham amply documented in his 1918 study, still a very useful study of the jurisdictional fragmentation and institutional conflict that characterized the governance of the Spanish Empire. Even regarding the organization of military operations, the governor was often thwarted by lack of cooperation and delaying tactics by subordinates. In 1614, as he was preparing a considerable expedition against the VOC, governor don Juan de Silva complained bitterly in his correspondence to the Crown about the reluctance to comply with orders emanating from the supreme military authority in the islands. The organization of this military action, by far the most ambitious attempted in Asian waters by the Hispanic Crown, turned out to be a logistic nightmare, hindered from its inception by the lack of coordination, personal animosities and the obstructive conduct of high-ranking military officials.

(cycles of violent elite conflict coincided with the juicios the residencia → the governorship as institutions in the Philippines)

(→ What are the *juicios de residencia*, and what does it tell us about the imperial governance of the Spanish Empire? → How to use the *juicios de residencia* to examine the local context of the Manila's urban complex? What is microhistory good for, in the context of urban colonial history?)
The Juicios de Residencia As a a Historical Source
As we have seen in the previous chapters, the governorship of Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera (1635-1643) was marred by conflict with the religious and municipal institutions (as he favoured the Jesuits over Franciscans, Augustinians, and Dominicans), corruption and nepotism, sharp depression of trade, the massacre of the Chinese community of Manila, and military setbacks like the loss of the Spanish presence in Taiwan. Under these circumstances, a harsh *juicio de residencia* was to be expected, with a large component of the colonial population viciously opposed to his rule. Corcuera’s troubles were compounded by the personal enmity with the newly arrived governor, Diego de Fajardo. Sebastián Hurtado’s brother, Íñigo de Corcuera, was the governor of the Islas Terceras (the current Azores Islands) while Fajardo was stationed there. The latter developed an intense hatred for Corcuera and his family over unpaid debts and slights to his honour. This antagonism was carried over across two oceans and, according to contemporary observers, Fajardo took the opportunity of Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera’s trial to exact an onerous vengeance. For his embezzlements, irregularities and disregard for the common good of the *Ciudad y Comercio de Manila*, Corcuera was fined the outlandish amount of 800,000 pesos. Moreover, he was thrown into jail as a preventive measure while the trial ran its course. According to Corcuera’s letters to the court, he was unlawfully placed under a strict regime of isolation and denied adequate legal representation.

Throughout the lengthy and acrimonious process that was a *juicio de residencia* in the Philippines, with dozens of interviews to conduct, confiscation of assets, and thorough review of incriminating documents, Diego Fajardo relied on Manuel Estacio Venegas to handle the tense and uncertain situation, giving him free rein to eliminate Corcuera’s network of power. According to most commentators, both contemporary observers of the events and modern-day historians, Fajardo was a moody and wistful individual, with a pronounced unease in the face of mundane social interaction. Navarrete comments that “he had great qualities for governing because he despised women and money.” He often retired to his quarters for days at a time, refusing to see anybody or conduct the arduous and demanding work of ruling such a diverse and conflictive city and colony. A Philippine governor had a great many responsibilities, both civic and military. Due to the vast distances separating Manila from Mexico and Madrid, he was in actual fact an independent and autonomous ruler during his tenure, with few constraints from the central authorities of the empire. In this context, Fajardo allowed Manuel Estacio to step in and handle the day-to-day business of government.

(Why choose a *valido*? : Rumours about poisoning and the *hechizamiento* of Fajardo by MEV using drugs : More prosaically, the thankless job of the Governor General and tremendous workload : Having a scapegoat : Fajardo’s own trial of residence was very mild)

(MEV plans to eliminate rivals : Olasso, Ayala, Almonte, and all the rest starting from Corcuera’s group)

(**El calabozo del azufre** : The experience of jail in colonial Manila)

(Presidios at the end of the world : the exile to Terrenate and Caraga)

By 1651, the position of Manuel Estacio was hanging on the edge. As we will see with more detail in the following pages, Estacio’s recourse to violence and imprisonment to dispose of his political rivals, his “unbounded tyranny” (as Diego de Hinojosa put it), created an atmosphere of fear and suspicion that could hardly be sustained for much longer. With plaintive letters and incensed complaints trickling out of the islands on their way to Spain, and a new governor set to arrive as soon as the Galleon route regained some much-needed stability, Governor Fajardo began to move against Estacio’s regime.

According to the Augustinian chronicler Casimiro Diaz, fray Jeronimo Medrano, *padre provincial* of the Augustinian order, managed to open the governor’s eyes to the widespread corruption and *mal gobierno* of his favourite. This remarkable turnabout looks much too swift and sudden. Domingo Fernández de Navarrete, who was present in Manila at the time and thus an eye-witness account of the events, offers a more nuanced and credible version. In his interpretation, Estacio’s fall had been brewing for some time. When the governor named Pedro de Almonte *maestre de campo* and gave him the command of the *Tercio de Manila*, Estacio Venegas took notice, “becoming very sorrowful, and somewhat anxious about his fortune; for since he had been so exalted, and that with no small acts of violence, he could fear that a fall would follow his steps.” The mistreatment of captain Juan de Zarauz, who was part of the governor’s family, seems to have been the final straw. This same Juan de Zarauz was put in charge of detaining Estacio, and the dawn of 17th of September, accompanied by a strong guard, Zarauz went to the Venegas palace, which fronted the main square of Manila, and put the erstwhile favourite under arrest in the Castle of Santiago. Navarrete vividly conveys the mood in Intramuros during this uncertain time:

>   Assi se experimento en este Dia de Santa Cruz de Setiembre, se derramó por la ciudad un eco sordo, de que le avian preso: todos quedavan mudos, sin atreverse a menear los labios, porque si no fuera verdad, lo pagaria bien cualquiera que hubiera hablado una sola palabra. Reforçose la nueva y aclarose, como le avian llevado preso a la fuerza de Santiago. Respiro la ciudad y quedo aliviada de tan pesada cruz, como años avia tenido sobre si, y el comenzo aquel dia a cargas la que Dios le embio.

The witness’ interrogations produced during Governor Fajardo’s *juicio de residencia* opens a more detailed perspective on the events of September 1651. As Navarrete’s story suggests, the imprisonment of MEV was a carefully planned operation that struck on several fronts at once. Speed and efficient coordination were of paramount importance if the considerable fortune and personal documentation of the Venegas family were to be seized in full. Manuel Estacio complained repeatedly during the trial about the manner in which his arrest was carried out. He accused Juan de Zarauz, of launching a malicious attack on his “person, honour and wealth with offensive arms (…) but also depriving me [Estacio] of my defensive weapons, that is, all my papers and documents (…) like the ones he took from my wife doña María de Perona, daring to dress her down to her underwear and search every part of her body (!), repugnant act if not outright vengeance.”[^2]

[^2]: . AGI ESCRIBANIA 440B, f.2944r: 

>   *Tantos testigos apremiados e inducidos por dos enemigos mios: el primero el sargento mayor Juan de Zarauz, que aviendole yo ayudado a subir a los puestos de capitan y sargento mayor deste real tercio y procurado que se le diesse una muy buena encomienda no bien agradecido a semejantes beneficios me pago con hacerme tan grandes // agravios en la salud, honra y hazienda como an sido tan publicos como mal padecidos aun mis mayores emulos y todo por ambicion de subir derrivando al que le avia subido a los puestos referidos, y no contento con averme ofendido con tamañas heridas dadas con armas ofensibas tan aventajosas me quito del todo las defensibas do todos mis papeles assi los que imbentario con orden y comission del señor don Diego como los que con la misma quito a doña Maria de Perona, mi muger, hasta ponerla en paños menores y escrutarle todas las partes de su cuerpo, torpe accion si ya no vengança hablando con la devida modestia que el no guardo de un hombre que se precia de noble para con una muger que quando no fuera tan principal como es público y notorio sino vulgar y pleveya le devia guardar los fueros que la naturaleza, la honestidad, el recato, la leyes y derechos quieren que le guarden a las mugeres.”*

María de Perona continued to live in the Venegas household, accompanied by her children, servants and slaves, but her movements and communication with friends and family outside of the household were severely restricted. Juan de Zarauz left a permanent guard at the house doors, with orders of intercepting any message that she might try to send to Estacio.

The detention of Manuel Estacio was just one piece of the puzzle. Over the next days and weeks, dozens of people were placed jailed under strict orders of isolation, where they would remain for months or even years. In the meantime, Governor Fajardo and the chief attorney of the *Real Audiencia* launched a protracted investigation that continued under the next governor, Manrique Lara, producing a staggering amount of documentation: at least 10,000 pages divided into 8 legajos, today housed in the Archivo General de Indias. We can understand this inquiry as a sort of radiography of power in Manila, that properly interpreted can help us to underline the crucial institutional posts and physical spaces that a faction needed to manage in order to establish control over the city. In the following pages, we will probe deeper into the Venegas-Perona racket, identifying the main accomplices and their role, through the witness’ depositions and a vast array of documents deployed in the trial against Estacio Venegas.

(The perks of being the favourite: getting deeper into MEV’s operation : list of subordinates and allies (Galvez, Moreno, slaves, Sosa) : distribution of roles and positions : The importance of location: almacenes, postigo, provincias, Castillo de Santiago, Puerto de Cavite = **Points of transit and restriction of mobility – transition to enclosure, jail and exile**)

(Confinement of physical bodies was obviously of paramount importance, but enclosing and protecting one’s documentary trace was just as crucial: The portfolio of documents represented and constructed the legal and financial identity of an individual, and even more a family/faction. It had to be carefully deployed in ways that enhanced the political chances of the player, but also secured and protected from outsiders’ eyes so as not to expose the illicit and often violent nature of the actions alluded to in the papers

/ Crucial to consider: the relation between act and its written transcript was a fundamental legal principle in the Hispanic world; an attempt to ensure the reliability of contracts and the lawful exertion of political force

/ Example of Andres de Galvez and the power to twist reality that an *escribano* had: witness intimidation, falsified documents, false depositions, blank signatures: this creates a sort of double bind, as we learn of these practices by way the same documentary procedures, the same theater of accusations


## Trade and Smuggling: Macau, Makassar, Mexico

The documentation of Manuel Estacio Venegas's *juicio de residencia* provides ample information to investigate the evolution of trade of the Philippines during a critical moment of transformation. Manuel Estacio was not just a military official and municipal administrator, but also a skillful merchant with a wide variety of business concerns. The network of trade contacts revealed in Estacio's private papers spans from Spain and Mexico to Makassar and Macau, but it also shows an active involvement in regional exchanges, within the Philippine archipelago itself.


## After the Earthquake: Architecture and Material Culture of Intramuros

<!--se_discussion_list:{"dzaUvj3q2rbYi2oHXm9V49qP":{"selectionStart":795,"selectionEnd":802,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Cite Juan de Palafox and correspondence of the viceroy of Mexico"}],"discussionIndex":"dzaUvj3q2rbYi2oHXm9V49qP"},"OgKbOeSPEe4ObogGJkdsVLnH":{"selectionStart":1755,"selectionEnd":1762,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"All things considered, this was a remarkably swift trip, compared with the route through Mexico. This in itself is revelatory about the advantage in maritime communication achieved by the Dutch over the Iberian powers."}],"discussionIndex":"OgKbOeSPEe4ObogGJkdsVLnH"},"UA1n7ssU2H1TS73P8uGWKhqD":{"selectionStart":6751,"selectionEnd":6756,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Gasch (2012: chapter 6)"}],"discussionIndex":"UA1n7ssU2H1TS73P8uGWKhqD"},"HIF8e6pOYB2gbinR9nHm7eE9":{"selectionStart":6557,"selectionEnd":6562,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Graffe, Yun, Elliott, Bethencourt,"}],"discussionIndex":"HIF8e6pOYB2gbinR9nHm7eE9"},"9LZ2K7uX4FyWMEb9MwAIO0Xa":{"selectionStart":6861,"selectionEnd":6866,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Which peaceful means? Some bibliography on elite competition in the Spanish Empire"}],"discussionIndex":"9LZ2K7uX4FyWMEb9MwAIO0Xa"},"wJEJ0f7snI4wCD6SdmYFUTEF":{"selectionStart":7001,"selectionEnd":7008,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Bibliography on factionalism: Subrahmanyam (2007: 1369), Gruzinski (1991: 353-362, 492-496), Spanish and Portuguese biblio."}],"discussionIndex":"wJEJ0f7snI4wCD6SdmYFUTEF"},"w18yN4PAEsNH3C0QzWmfmnk7":{"selectionStart":11335,"selectionEnd":11335,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"How was this selection made? Small number of families, military experience, background in Flanders and the Americas (often both)"}],"discussionIndex":"w18yN4PAEsNH3C0QzWmfmnk7"},"SkwKvBAfpTxUUp0LbtuFbdfp":{"selectionStart":11335,"selectionEnd":11335,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Formation of a commercial oligarchy that was impervious to the Crown demands, both before and after the Braganza restorarion. However, —> Under Chinese jurisdiction: look for the bibliography"}],"discussionIndex":"SkwKvBAfpTxUUp0LbtuFbdfp"},"Nnzvh8Ae0ti98ASFbcdCQkRJ":{"selectionStart":11335,"selectionEnd":11335,"commentList":[{"author":"Nico","content":"Negotiated empires, composite monarchies, polycentric monarchies"}],"discussionIndex":"Nnzvh8Ae0ti98ASFbcdCQkRJ"}}-->