---
title: "Chapter 6: Domestic Slavery and the Definition of Boundaries"
---

 

Introduction
------------

 

The Complex Landscape of Hispano-Philippine Slavery
---------------------------------------------------

In 1679, the Audiencia of Manila received a *real cédula* ordering the abolition of slavery in the Philippine Islands. Originally written with the region of Chile in mind, where the Araucano people had been waging a century-long war of resistance against the Hispanic Monarchy, the royal order addressed a highly controversial issue since the very beginning of the American conquest: the enslavement of *indios naturales.* By the 17th century it had become an empire-wide problem, with great repercussions for the Philippine colony and the city of Manila. The status of *indio* slaves was very much an unsettled issue towards the end of the 17th century, with the the letter of the law clashing with everyday practice. Numerous legal loopholes, as wells as outright disregard for the protections granted by the royal authority to its Indian vassals, allowed the continuation of forms of slavery that were meant to be eradicated already in the 16th century.

This issue was especially acute in the Hispanic Monarchy’s frontiers, where access to legal recourse was harder to acquire for people kept in unlawful bondage. (Claims to freedom were difficult to substantiate even in Sevilla or Mexico, but even more so in frontier spaces like the Philippines or South Peru). Hard living conditions, a constant need for labour, and distance to the centres of authority gave motive and opportunity for the creation of “enslavement” economies. War and frequent violent conflict were prevalent at the frontier. Considering that capture in just war was the main legal justification for enslavement, it is not surprising that the frontiers acted as a .

The royal cedula of 1676 reasserted the doctrine of natural liberty of the *indio*, firmly established in Spanish colonial law since the mid-16th century (Las Casas, etc.). However, this order should not be interpreted merely as an endorsement of a legal principle; it also had a practical and strategic purpose: enslavement was considered detrimental to the pacification of “rebellious and unruly” people who refused the sovereignty of the Crown and resisted Christian indoctrination. Instead of a policy of *castigo* (punishment) and enslavement, royal officials at the frontier should make use of Christian kindness and persuasive tactics in order to facilitate religious conversion.

The Audiencia of Manila responded to the decree by pointing out the difficulties that the implementation of the royal orders was having in the Philippine Islands. In particular, the *oidores* highlight the opposition and outright refusal of Barangay heads of Pampanga and the Visayas to liberate their slaves, as well as the economic and social crisis that a hasty execution of the abolitionist policy would surely bring about. The document belabors to communicate to the Council of Indies the extent to which slavery and bonded labour were integral to the social fabric of the Philippines, long before the Spanish set foot in the islands. (quote). The situation in Manila, the main and almost sole urban centre in the Spanish Philippines, was somewhat different. Spanish, Filipino and Chinese elite alike held numerous retinues of domestic slaves. Unfree labour of different types was crucial to the economic life of the city, but by 1680 slavery had declined significantly. However, the liberation of the thousands of slaves owned by individuals and institutions (including the religious orders) was by no means an inconsequential step to take.

One of the most interesting claims made in the Audiencia’s report refers to the specificity of Philippinian slavery, which is portrayed as having a very different character than slavery in the Americas. According to the Audiencia, Philippine slaves comprised by a bewildering diversity of people from all corners of the world. While the ethnic origin of slaves living in Mexico, Peru or indeed the Peninsula was relatively easy to determine, this was far from the case in the Philippine Islands. The Audiencia stresses that in the New World the differences in appearance between *indios* and *negros* were readily obvious. This allowed the relevant judicial authorities, armed with supporting documentation, to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate claims to freedom, based on *naturaleza*: that is, birth in communities which could be justifiably categorized as “naturally Indian”. Indian here, of course, refers to a specific legal category that nonetheless is founded on a perception of racial and cultural difference, both from Spaniards and Blacks.

However, in the Philippines, the categories *indio* and *negro* (further complicated by the presence of Chinese, Korean and Japanese slaves) intersected to a much higher degree. Moreover, the overarching term *negro* or *cafre* comprised a wide variety of peoples without much in common except a somewhat dark complexion. The Audiencia then proceeds to “unpack” this loose category, spelling out in some detail the places of origin and characteristics of the different groups commonly referred to as *negros*.

Violence and Urban Transformation in the Early Modern Philippines
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The foundation of a city involves the transformation of space, both physically and symbolically, and this is usually a violent affair. In this section, I will focus on the early history of Spanish Manila, and explore the complex process of political and religious appropriation of the Manila region. The establishment of a successful urban base in the Philippines was facilitated by circulation of goods, knowledge and cultural artifacts, and at the same time it constituted a springboard for new movements and connections (not always commercial and peaceful). The particular fashion in which Manila was invented (that is, the symbolic principles and political aims that animated the fortifications, urban grid and program of reductions) had far-reaching consequences for the hinterland of Manila and the Spanish empire.

How the establishment of an urban base in Manila, and the circulation of European urban traditions and models into the Philippines, depended on the exertion of physical violence? And what kind of social and cultural changes the invention of Spanish Manila provoked in its hinterland? In broader terms, what is the relation between city-building and the maintenance of the Spanish settlement in Southeast Asia, and the various forms of bondage and slavery that coexisted throughout the colonial period? More specifically, I will argue that the gradual development of a Spanish-ruled urban settlement in the Philippines was possible thanks to a practice (controversial and contested but well-established) of predatory violence (plunder and enslavement) which constituted the basis of power relations between the Spanish and the Tagalog populations and over time developed into more regularized forms of fiscal exaction. This was part of a large-scale transformation that affected land-use patterns, gender constructs, notions and practices of political authority as well as trade movements and fiscal matters.

The conquest of the Philippines has been usually considered in relation to the conquest of the Americas, in particular the Caribbean. From this perspective, many historians concluded that the conquest of the Philippine archipelago was relatively quick and peaceful, without the large-scale depopulation that marked the occupation of the Caribbean islands and later the Aztec and Inca empires. Spanish *conquista* of the Philippines has been characterized as mainly religious and missional, focused on the conversion of the indigenous population. According to John Leddy Phelan, for example, the lessons learned in the colonization of the Americas made the "military conquest swift and and relatively bloodless." This was indeed the desire of Philip II, evidenced by the instructions given to Miguel de Legazpi when he embarked in the expedition of 1565. This document, clearly influenced by Bartolome de las Casas and Francisco de Vitoria's ideas regarding natural law and the rights of Indian populations, insists on the need to respect the property and person of the Philippine natives. To quote Phelan again, to Legazpi "must be given the credit in large measure for realizing substantially but not completely Philip II's ideal of a pacific occupation."

There are several reasons to doubt this interpretation, as authors such as Alonso Alvarez, Henry Scott or Laura Newson have done: First off, what is meant exactly by qualifiers like "relatively" or "substantially but not completely"? The violence of the Philippine conquest seems overshadowed by the sheer scale of devastation and brutality that accompanied the colonization of the Americas. This may be true, but it does not lead us any closer to an understanding of the role of violence in the formation of the Spanish Philippines, and more specifically Manila. In other words, rather than comparing the level of violence I would like to focus on the function of violence: how was violence (and the threat of violent attack) used to build the political structure of Spanish power in the archipelago? I am pointing not just to social structures, but concretely to the material structures that allowed the Spanish to maintain their foothold in Southeast Asia: defensive walls and fortresses, military equipment, administrative and religious buildings, housing, ships (both for trade and warfare), etc.

A second problem with the "peaceful conquest" interpretation has to do with the chronology of the conquest. The conquest, in my view, should be understood as a more extended period than usually assumed: the frequent *pacificaciones*, as well as the quelling of revolts, reveal an ongoing imposition of Spanish military power on the mostly autonomous Filipino villages of Luzon and the Visayas that was still active in the 18th century. In short, the transformation of predatory violence into a fiscal system was a long and varied process depending on the region. The establishment of tribute, bandala (forced sale) and polo (forced labour) was but a continuation, under clearer rules, rights and responsibilities, of the exactions made under direct threat of violence during the *entradas* of the initial phase, say from 1565 and 1580. This process was allowed by the incorporation of native leaders (known as *datus* in most Philippine languages, and as *principales* for the Spanish) in the colonial system as *cabezas de barangay*: due to the small number of Crown officials, the collection of tributes and the mobilization of labour came to be organized through indirect rule.

To understand this process of political incorporation of native elites, we need to briefly revise some aspects of social organization prevalent in prehispanic Philippines. A first point that has to be emphasized is that the island of Luzon, where Manila was situated, were not static, mired in a perpetual state of "nature", but was involved in a process of change and political consolidation. Since at least the beginning of the 16th century, Manila had become a substantial port of trade, famous around the archipelago, of about 2,000 inhabitants (a far cry from Malacca, but by then the largest settlement in the Philippines). Its rulers (Matanda and Suleiman, the old and young rajahs in the Spanish sources) had kinship ties with the sultans of Brunei. Lakandula, chief of Tondo, on the north bank of the Pasig river, was also related to the royal family of Brunei. Islam and Islamic notions of political authority were spreading in the archipelago (more in the Southern island of Mindanao) and, according to Reed, this favoured synoecism, the integration of towns under a capital city and unified rule. However, when Legazpi and his forces arrived to Manila, this process was in its infancy. The rulers of Manila were *primus inter pares*, the leaders of a loose confederation of *datus*, who ruled over their own *barangays*. This was the main unit of social organization, forming independent villages ranging from dozens to hundreds of families. *Barangays* had a three class structure: the elite (*datus* and maginoo); the freemen, divided into *maharlika* (warriors) and *timawas* (farmers and labourers); the rest of the population formed a dependent class (called *alipin*) that the Spanish likened, somewhat misleadingly, to slaves. The *alipin* were further subdivided into *alipin sa namamahay* and *alipin sa gigilid*. I can't elaborate as much as needed on the society of PreHispanic Luzon, but it will suffice to focus on three interralated aspects: 1) Wealth did not depend on the control over land, but on possession of movable goods and, more importantly, control over manpower, both slave and free. 2) Population density was quite low: wet rice cultivation was known but not predominant; instead most *barangays* subsisted on *slash-and-burn* cultivation techniques, which did not produce important suplus. 3) Spanish observers pointed time and again to the political fragmentation and dispersed settlement of Luzon, and this was seen as a sign of barbarism and backwardness. In the words of Father Alzina:

*The common policía is not a trivial matter but a very necessary one, and more for this sort of people, who were used to live isolated in remote places, a few in each, so they were very much lacking in the communication among men for political dealings and for the correspondence and dependence on each other.*

*La de la policia comun no es vulgar causa sino muy necesaria y mas para este genero de gente, que estaban hechos a vivir apartados y por rincones, pocos en cada cual, con que les faltaba antes mucho de la comunicacion de hombres para el trato politico y para la correspondencia y dependencia de unos con otros.*

One of the main objectives of the secular and religious Spanish authorities was to execute a program of resettlement, concentrating the population of several small villages in larger towns organized aroung a church. This system of *reducciones* was already applied in different parts of the Americas, particularly in frontier zones. It had a practical motivation (so a small number of priests could evangelize a larger number of people) but was also inspired by Spanish cultural attitudes that put great emphasis on *policía*: civilized life, Christian morality and political order were only possible in the context of cities and towns. This conception had deep intellectual roots coming back to Aristotle and St. Augustine, and it became one of the main organizing principles of the Spanish colonization of the Americas and the Philippines. Historians have long recognized the role of cities in the Spanish empire as the essential tool and vehicle of the Crown's rule over newly conquered regions. The Ordenanzas de Poblacion y Descubrimiento of Philip II, issued in 1573, represent the codification of almost a century of experience in urban creation in the New World. They were meant as a deliberate attempt to reduce violence and encroachment upon native population's rights, but also to restrict the *conquistadores* independence and develop an more stable institutional framework. It is highly significant that the turn form *Conquista* to *Población y Descubrimiento* went hand in hand with a regularization of urban planning. However*,* this policy of urbanization did not necessarily mean that the colonial regime was less violent, just that violence was more controlled, organized and subject to lawful aplication. At least, of course, in principle.

If we focus on the early history of Manila, it is clear, I think, that the plunder (in food, gold or labour) of Filipino barangays was rerouted and concentrated in Manila (and to a lesser extent Cebu and other Spanish *presidios*) where it funded the fortification and monumentalization of the city, as well as the overall military power of the Spanish (ships, guns, soldiers, sailors, supplies etc.). There are many instances in the documentary record of what I have been calling predatory violence, but they are often clouded on the "sanitized", so to speak, language of pacification. Predatory violence was not only directed to the acquisition of food or valuable goods, but crucially to the acquisition of manpower: slaves, servants, conscripted auxiliaries, workers in shipyards or construction, etc. In a certain way, the appropriation of the Manila area was tied to a process in which control over the dependent population of the *datus* (his personal retinue and slave workforce) passed to Spanish institutions (secular and religious) as well as individuals through a system of *encomienda, polo y servicio* (akin to the mita in Peru) as well as outright slavery. The formation of a substantial workforce dedicated to the construction and supply of Manila disrupted traditional systems of cultivation, as well as forms of social hierarchy and personal allegiance. The question of slavery is a crucial if complex one in this framework, but maybe we can discuss it further on question time.

Native Filipino, particularly Tagalog, population shouldered most of the cost of building Manila's urban fabric, but that is not the whole of the story. A city is a complex artifact, composed of many parts coming from different places. Without the monetary and logistic support sent from Mexico across the Pacific the nascent city probably would not have survived its birth-pangs. An inventory list of things needed in Manila, written around 1573, can give us a glimpse of the circulation of goods during the very early history of the Manila Galleon: military supplies are of paramount importance (iron, lead, powder, pitch, rigging for sails, saltpetre, weapons such as pikes, arquebuses and corselets) as well as military expertise (engineers, experts in the making and use of artillery, ship-builders, sail makers). It also mentions the need for construction tools (saws, axes), ceremonial goods for mass (oil, incense and wine), writing instruments (paper, ink and binded books for accounts), religious books and clocks. Also, black slaves, because, according to the source, native labour was insufficient and untrustworthy. To sum up, the establishment of a successful urban base in the Philippines was facilitated by exploitation of native labour as well as the circulation of goods, knowledge and cultural artifacts, and at the same time this urban transformation constituted a springboard for new movements and connections.

Most of this supplies mentioned in the inventory were already, or soon came to be, procured locally and regionally. The continuous growth of the China trade and the arrival of Chinese settlers, as well as commerce with Portuguese enclaves (particularly important in regards to the slave trade to Manila) marked what Luis Alonso Álvarez has called the transition from territorial empire to commercial intermediation between New Spain and China. This turning point can be dated at the end of the 1580s, and more exactly during the governorship of Gomes Dasmariñas (1590-1593). Fiscal receipts from the *almojarifazgo* (a tax on trade) increased substantially the period 1585-1595, but indigenous tribute still formed the largest share of fiscal income. There are two other features of Dasmariñas governorship that deserve mention. First, he embarked on a great program of construction, to reinforce the defenses of the city and protect it from the frequent fires. If in 1585 most of the houses were built in wood and palm, by 1609 Antonio de Morga already described Manila as a stone-built urban environment. Second, alarmed by the negative effect of the tribute collection (which was received in specie and valued at very low prices, so the 8 reales of legal contribution supposed rather 30 or 40 reales in market value), payments in coin started to be accepted, which lessened the burden on local communities, reducing the need to produce agricultural surplus and impulsing the monetization of the economy. Coupled with the arrival of thousands of skilled Chinese workers, migration from all over Luzon and the Visayas to the expanding commercial and political centre that was Manila, resulted in the formation of a pool of wage labourers and food producers dwelling in the villages around Manila's Intramuros, which is a crucial but seldom mentioned aspect of the growth of the city, from around 2,000 in 1570 to 40,000 in less than forty years.

The presence of Chinese and Filipino wage labourers did not completely replaced forced labour. If anything bonded labour increased in importance in order to support Spanish naval power. The growth of trade with China led to the construction of bigger galleons for the transpacific route, and this meant that a larger workforce was needed to cut wood, transport it to the shipyards of Cavite and the Visayas, as well as build the ships and man the row benches of the galleys that patrolled the archipelago’s waters. Even more importantly, the arrival of the Dutch to Southeast Asia at the end of the 16th century, and the creation of the VOC in 1602, led to 50 years of almost uninterrupted maritime warfare between the Spanish empire and the Dutch Republic. The effects on local communities of this massive war effort are often cited as the main reason for the decline of the population of Luzon, which began to grow again after 1650. Moreover, the Dutch were not only enemies: tension with the Chinese empire and Japan, *wako* pirates, *moro* raiders from Mindanao and Sulu. In short, Manila was situated in the midst of dangerous, violent and competitive maritime space, so the development and maintenance of means of coercion and violence, both for internal and external use, was a fundamental concern throughout the 16th and 17th centuries.

Slavery and Sexual Morality
---------------------------

In 1635, soon after Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera had arrived to take possession of his governorship, an artillery-man named Francisco de Nava drew a dagger and stabbed a female slave, named María, in plain view of Doña María de Francia (the wife of Pedro de Corcuera, the governor’s nephew), and the shocked public that was strolling around the Convent of Saint Augustin on their way to see “the comedy which the fathers [of the Society of Jesus] were presenting.”[^1] Before the *alguaciles* in charge of keeping the peace could react, Francisco de Nava darted inside the church and sought religious sanctuary from the military justice. An Augustinian chronicler described the scene as such: “Going to her [María] he asked her whether she knew him, who was her master. The slave answered him with some independence, whereupon he, blind with anger, drew his dagger in the middle of the street and killed her by stabbing her, before anyone could prevent it. All the people, both those in the carriage and those in the street, ran tumultuously [after him]; but the artilleryman escaped them all, and took refuge in the church of our convent in Manila.”[^2] However, Sebastián Hurtado was not one to worry about the proper jurisdictional demarcations. Paying little mind to the protests of Archbishop Hernando Guerrero and the Augustinian priests, Hurtado instructed his nephew, Pedro de Corcuera (who had been recently named sargent in the Philippine army), to round up a company of soldiers and force his entry into the church. A meticulous search of the premises ensued, while the convent was surrounded by a double guard. The governor declared “that he would not allow the religious to enter or leave, until he had hold of the refugee.” The culprit was finally handed out to the legitimate authority in a case involving an enrolled soldier: its military superior, the commander of artillery in Manila’s camp.[^3] Pressured by the governor, the commander condemned Francisco de Nava in a rather hasty manner, and de Nava was executed soon after, the 6th of September 1635, “hanged on the same spot where he had killed the slave-girl.”

[^1]: B&R Vol. XXVI, autor-date

[^2]: Casimiro Díaz, Conquistas de las Islas Filipinas, Parte Segunda (Valladolid, 1890). Translated in B&R Vol. XXV.

[^3]: B&R, Vol. XXVI, p. 103. “On the twenty-seventh of this month, a negro belonging to the said convent gave information that the guilty man was in a cell therein. The governor sent Adjutant Don Juan de Frias and Alferez Don Diego de Herrero with soldiers, giving them the order to take away the man, even though the religious tried to hinder him. This they did, and could not be resisted; and as a reward for taking him out, a post of sergeant was given to the adjutant, and a military command to the alferez.”

This episode was the start of an acrimonious rift between the civil and religious authorities of Manila. Displeased by Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera’s actions regarding Francisco de Nava’s case and other perceived infringements on ecclesiastic rights, the archbishop declared an interdict on the governor in April of 1636. Religious services were suspended, throwing the regular rhythms of urban life into disarray. Corcuera reacted by detaining the archbishop, violating again ecclesiastic prerogatives. Archbishop Guerrero was sent into exile to the island of Mariveles, in Manila Bay, which caused great scandal around the Philippines and beyond.[^4] Hernando Guerrero finally relented; on 19 May 1636, after a month of back and forth between the governor and the archbishop, regular ministrations and divine services resumed.[^5]

[^4]: AGI FILIPINAS, 80, N. 207. “Cartas sobre escándalos y enfrentamientos en la Orden de San Francisco de Filipinas.” This is just one of the many letters sent from both from Corcuera and the Mendicant Orders to the court, trying to spin the story in their favour. It is also mentioned in the correspondence of Marqués de Caldereta, Viceroy of New Spain. See: AGI MEXICO 31, N.49 “Cuaderno de Cartas del Virrey Marqués de Caldereta”, as well as AHN Diversos-Colecciones 34, N.45 “Quejas sobre el gobernador de Filipinas.”

[^5]: AUST Tomo 49, Documentos curiosos, “Carta del arzobispo Guerrero, a 19 de mayo de 1636” (fol. 101r): “Nos don fray Hernando Guerrero por la gracia de dios y de la santa sede apostolica, arzobispo de de las islas philipinas y del consejo de su magestad por la pressente usando misericordia con los charissimos hijos de la ciudad de Manila donde tengo puesto entredicho y cesatio a divinis general por caussas lexitimas que para ello me mueven y le lebanto in totum por quinze dias naturales que se entienden y quentan desde la fecha desta, asta cumplido el dicho numero, y asi podran vista esta tocar y repicar las campanas y celebrar los oficios divinos todos generalmente con la solemnidad que se suele con tal que no se admitan los publicos descomulgados a los oficios divinos sin que primero se absuelban con la persona a quien tengo dad autoridad para ello.”

While this case of jurisdictional conflict has been studied with some detail,[^6] little attention has been paid to the role of the slave María in the affair. According to the same chronicler, María had been serving Francisco de Nava as a slave for some time, and had “illicit communication” with him. [^7] The archbishop Guerrero heard about the situation and forced Francisco de Nava to get rid of her, placing María under the care of a lady close to María de Francia, who took a liking for María and decided to buy her from Francisco de Nava. But he was not persuaded to let her go. De Nava followed María around and tried to convince her to marry him, to no avail. He began acting erratically, and the governor ordered that “that he be taken into the house of Pedro Guerrero, and there punished as if he were mad.” But not even violence and imprisonment could discourage him: “On one occasion he had received a sound beating at the house of Doña María de Francia, because he had gone there to request that they should give him the slave, as he had resolved to make her his wife.” The anonymous author of the *Relación de Sucesos de los años 1635 y 1636* writes that the enslaved woman spurned him in public, saying to de Nava that she would rather serve as a slave to another than suffer him as a wife, at which point Francisco de Nava murdered her, setting in motion the chain of events described above.

[^6]: Charles Henry Cunningham, The Audiencia in the Spanish Colonies ... (University of California Press, 1919); Onofre D. Corpuz, The Bureaucracy in the Philippines (Institute of Public Administration, University of the Philippines, 1957); Nicholas P. Cushner, Spain in the Philippines, from Conquest to Revolution (Ateneo de Manila University, 1971); Alexandre Coello de la Rosa, “Los Conflictos Jurisdiccionales Entre Los Arzobispos de Manila Y Los Jesuitas Por Las Doctrinas de Indios (siglos XVI-XVIII),” Boletín Americanista 0, no. 67 (2013): 105–24.

[^7]: Another version of the same material can be found in AUST Tomo 49, Papeles Curiosos. At the RAH Papeles de Jesuitas, there is another account, more sympathetic to the governor. It is translates and annotated in B&R XXVI, when substantial amount of information about the affair can be found.

This case illustrates the pervasive presence of slavery in the social fabric of the city, while bringing to the fore the lack of information we have about individual slaves, not to mention their personal experience or self-perception. María was very likely born far away from Manila, perhaps brought to the Philippines by Portuguese traders, or captured in the numerous wars that Spaniards fought against the Muslim sultanates of Mindanao and Borneo. We know nothing of her native origin, the name given to her at birth or her life story, other than what is written in the accounts of Spanish priests, which do not go further than her public murder in front of Saint Augustin Church. Slaves often appear in the Spanish sources as token figures, enigmas stripped of individuality and agency. However, this episode, and others that we will explore in the following pages, suggest some patterns in the social, economic and legal situation of Hispano-Philippine slavery that allow us to paint a fuller and more detailed picture of Manila’s urban world. What can we then infer from this gruesome affair?

First, one might note the complex and pivotal role that slavery had in the factional politics of the Spanish Philippines, an element usually portrayed in the historiography as the exclusive domain of a very restricted elite. Unwittingly, this strand of scholarship makes the study of the ‘subaltern’ population something of a curiosity, valuable from an ethical standpoint as a way to bring voice to the voiceless, but ultimately divorced from the traditional concerns of imperial history, such as trade, war or institutions. However, I would argue that there was a persisting confluence of moral issues, reputation and political affairs in the Spanish Empire, and certainly we can see this element in action in the Philippines. Slavery, and more specifically the sexual misbehaviour of masters with their dependents and members of lower status social groups, was often the object of controversies which had far-reaching consequences. How men of power conducted themselves in relation to the standards of Catholic morality was part and parcel of their personal honour and social standing. Therefore, accusations of deviancy and immoral acts could have a pernicious effect on the public career of royal officials and priests alike. The sources teem with these sort of attacks on sexual conduct, which discredited the offender for public or religious office. To go no further than the episode between the governor and the archbishop discussed above, when Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera tried to push Don Andres Arias de Jirón, (*un hombre de su parcialidad*, a man of his clique) as archdeacon of Manila’s Cathedral, Hernando de Guerrero responded that Andrés Arias had committed several moral transgressions that disqualified him from the post, and were still in the process of investigation:

>   A case of abortion; another case of simony; another case of bribery that he took while being *provisor* for divorcing two married people against justice; another cause for having cohabited with the aforementioned married woman, while being the judge of her divorce; another cause for having four free women in his house for 8 years, imprisoned as slaves, and cohabiting with one of them during this time; an all these many causes have enough number of witnesses.[^8]

[^8]: AUST, Tomo 49, Documentos Curiosos, ff. 85r-86v: “una caussa de aborto = otra caussa de simonia = otra caussa de un cohecho que llevo siendo provisor por divorsiar dos cassados contra justicia = otra caussa por aver estado amanzebado y tenido en su cassa a la muger cassada con quien lo estava siendo proveedor (provisor?) = otra caussa por aver tenido quatro mugeres libres en su cassa tiempo de ocho años teniendolas como esclavas, y estuvo amanzebado con la una de ellas todo el dicho tiempo que las cuales muchas caussas estan con vastante numero de testigos.” According to the dictionary of the Real Academia Española (RAE) a provisor is “a diocesan judge named by the bishop, with whom constitutes a tribunal, and has authority in ecclesiastic cases.”

In another example dating from 1650, the general Juan de Salinas was accused of repeatedly taking an “Indian from Tondo,” Ignacia Pérez, out the public jail of Manila, supposedly to continue their “illicit friendship”, thus displaying insolence and disregard for the royal authorities.[^9] Manuel Estacio Venegas, whose career will examine in detail in the next chapter, was expelled from the Mesa de la Misericordia for cohabiting with a black woman, in all likelihood a slave.[^10] The frequency and prominent place of these denunciations in the trial records shows that they carried real weight, and constituted an effective smear on a political rival.

[^9]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, ff. 4118v-4119v. “Una yndia del pueblo de Tondo llamada Ygnacia Perez, [Juan de Salinas] tiene con ella amistad ylícita y atrevimiento a sacarla de dicha carcel llevándola a algunas cassas desta ciudad a desoras de la noche para verse con ella quebrantado en ello la carselería de la susodicha para cuyo remedio y para el castigo que los susodichos merecen por el delicto que an cometido.”

[^10]: Inmaculada Alva Rodríguez, Vida Municipal En Manila (siglos XVI-XVII) (Córdoba: Universidad de Córdoba, Servicio de Publicaciones, 1997). The original reference can be found in AGI ESCRIBANIA 412B, f. 460

The constant recourse to this tactic and the ease with which false jurors could be produced in Manila may cast some doubt on the accuracy of the denunciations on moral indecency, often invented in order to attack an enemy. However, while individual charges might be fabricated, the overall pattern of sexual slavery and concubinage is fairly evident in the Philippine sources. This should come as no surprise for the student of colonial cities in Southeast Asia. In Manila, as in Macau and Batavia, there was a persistent dearth of European women. The long-distances involved and the high mortality of newcomers discouraged the arrival the female settlers. The result was concubinage and some degree of intermarriage with native women and even female slaves, as the case of Francisco de Nava shows. However, it is my impression that in the 17th century Philippines, marriage between European males and Southeast Asian women was less frequent than in the *Estado da India* or the VOC-controlled settlements, carrying a substantial degree of social opprobrium. Whether this a result of a lack of systematic research on gender and intermarriage for the early colonial period or an actual phenomenon, is a question than at this point is rather difficult to answer.

Violence, Resistance and Information: The Cases of Esteban Logon and Ana Doy
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

While the discussion so far may give the impression that slaves were utterly helpless and deprived of agency, the situation was more complex and variable. The position of slaves as domestic servants, their main occupation in urban centres like Manila, gave them inside knowledge regarding unlicensed or ignominious activities carried out by their masters. Although we tend to think of social control as one way imposition from the ruling elite to their dependents and social inferiors, it is best conceptualized as a two-way dynamic that had vertical (high-low status interaction) as well as horizontal (control by one’s peers) elements, developed of course under unequal conditions of power distribution. In any case, there were instances in which the slaves could leverage the information acquired regarding the clandestine dealings of their masters to threaten them with scandal and thus resist ill treatment and coercion. Members of the Spanish elite were always under the watchful eyes of their personal retinue, under surveillance in a way, even though the ability to act upon this information was highly asymmetrical.

Sometimes these attempts resulted in tragic consequences for the slave informant, as it occurred in the two cases we will explore in the following pages. It revolves around the captain Estebán de Arce, a long-time settler in the Philippines who was stationed in the shipyard of Panamao, in present-day Biliran Island. This shipyard was already active in 1588, being mentioned in Cavendish account of his raiding expedition in the Philippines.[^11] This place seems to have been an important construction site for the Manila galleons, and was part of the Jesuit mission in Northern Samar, as the Jesuit chronicler Pedro Chirino informs us. In the 17th century, this island and its neighbouring region was quite isolated from Manila, a factor to keep in mind as we unravel this complicated story. The irregular contact with the main centre of Spanish power was frequently threatened by Moro raiders from the Southern Philippines. However, its abundant tinder was well suited to build the top masts of the huge ships that carried out the trans-Pacific trade, and its position near Desembocadero, the final straits before leaving the Philippine archipelago and sailing into the open waters of the Pacific Ocean, made it an ideal base for provisioning and resupplying the galleons.

[^11]: Quoted in Rolando O. Borrinaga, “A Survey of Historical Sites in Biliran Province” [http://www.reocities.com/rolborr/surveyhistory.html]

The date of Estebán de Arce’s arrival to the shipyard is unclear, no later in any case than 1643.[^12] He was commissioned to oversee the construction of the Galleon “Nuestra Señora de Guía”, shipwrecked in 1650, which curiously is also the date of Arce’s trial. We can find the proceedings embedded in the many pages of Manuel Estacio Venegas’ *juicio de residencia*. I will base the main thrust of the story on the declaration given by the witness Juan Martín de Estrada, a soldier and public notary of Panamao. His deposition is corroborated by other witness, which provide however little additional information. It is quite long and full of interesting and sometimes puzzling details, which I have tried to decipher to the best of my ability. Unfortunately, the proceedings of Arce’s defence are not included in the summary, which leaves us in a somewhat unbalanced footing regarding the veracity of the charges.

[^12]: He seems to have been close to governor Corcuera, who was replaced by Fajardo in 1643 and subjected to a harsh juicio de residencia.

The testimony of José Martín de Estrada paints a very unfavourable picture Estebán de Arce’s management of the shipyard as its highest-ranked official. Thanks to the relative remoteness of Panamao, Arce was able to rule among the soldiers and workers stationed at the shipyard with an iron hand, without supervision or fear of interference from Manila. Estrada and other witnesses accused him of handing out stern punishments for petty infractions. Estrada declared that Arce had a sailor, called Gil Martín, beaten to death after more than two hundred hits with a *bejuco*,[^13] for a minor infringement such as assaulting a local Visayan (*descalabrar a un indio Visaya)*.[^14] Sargent Bartolomé de Padilla relates the same incident, observing that Estebán de Arce spurred the two Pampanga soldiers that were administering the punishment by shouting “hit him until he relinquishes his soul to the Devil.” He adds that Arce was fond whipping and gagging those who cursed or talked out of turn, and that the discipline was so harsh and arbitrary that at some point there was fear of a general mutiny among the troops.[^15]

[^13]: Bejuco is a word of Caribbean origin, used as a general term for vine-like climbing plants found in tropical climates. It had a multitude of uses, mainly to weave baskets and chairs, but also, as in this case, to construct tools of punishment.

[^14]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f. 4010r.: “Y assimismo sabe este testigo que puede aver cinco o seis meses poco más o menos que por una falta muy lebe que dieron de Gil Martin, marinero le hizo meter en el sepo y en él le hizo dar con un bexuco segun le dixeron a este testigo passando serca del cuerpo de guardia algunos soldados, a Gil le estan castigando porque dicen que descalabro a un yndio y despues bolviendo este testigo para su cassa vido al dicho Gil, marinero como que no se podra tener en pie y muy lloroso, baxad a la cabeza y nunca más le bolvio a ver este testigo y le dixeron como estaba muy malo y que los estuvo hasta que murio y presume este testigo y tiene por cierto fue de los palos que el dicho capitan le hizo dar por que asi fue público y porque antes que le diessen dichos palos parece que vendia salud por ser hombre muy sano y robusto y más siendo recien venido de Castilla.”

[^15]: ESCRIBANIA 440C, f. 4012v.: “Y les mandó a los dos dichos pampangos le diesse dichos palos y en cansándose uno le dava otro diciendo el dicho capitan, dale hasta que dé el alma al diablo, que al parezer de este testigo le dieron más de doscientos palos con los vejucos que tiene dichos que son como de horquilla y desde el dicho dia no se lebanto mas el dicho Gil Martin (…) qual vido este testigo darle en la forma que queda referido que por lo dicho y otros rigores de la mesma calidad, asotes con penca que mandava dar y mordaças que ponía sin caussa solo porque hablavan recio, se temio un mottin y alboroto en dicho astillero

One of main charges levelled against Arce was that he used his position to build a very profitable business of extortion and petty trade. For example, by using threats and deception in equal measure, he convinced a number of soldiers to forego half their wages in order to balance the account books of the shipyard. The construction Galleon “Nuestra Señora de Guía” had run over budget, which was the norm rather than the exception in the history of the trans-Pacific trade.[^16] The donation from the troops’ salary was used to buy supplies and tradable items. The soldiers received receipts from their contribution, but when the items were purchased, Estrada remarked that many had noticed that the quantity of *mantas crudas*[^17] purchased had no proportion with what they had contributed.[^18] The witness then asserts that captain Estebán de Arce must have profited at least two hundred pesos after selling the items in Cebu. Estrada also claims that Arce had conspired with Augustinian friars of Cebu and Masbate to receive basic supplies (such as rice, salted meats and cheese) on credit, only to resell them at an inflated price to his troops, as well as manipulating the weighting scales. These actions “made Estrada a large quantity of pesos in the time he was in the shipyard.”[^19] In another occasion, Estebán de Arce used his influence to intercede in favour of a Sangley named Quienv, head of the guild of smiths, who was owed 500 pesos by the royal treasury. Unable to obtain payment, Quienv appealed to Arce. With the assistance of Estrada, Arce fudged the accounts and made it seem that Quienv was actually owed 1,500 pesos. Quienv was paid his original debt of 500 pesos, and Arce pocketed a thousand pesos in the process.

[^16]: William Lytle Schurz, The Manila Galleon (Manila: Historical Conservation Society, 1985). P. 164-166.

[^17]: A very common textile product from the Philippines, with a multitude of uses. Blanket could be the closest translation in English, but still quite inaccurate.

[^18]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f. 3898v. “El dicho capitan Esteban de Arce les fue librando a una paga a otros a paga y media y a lgunos dos pagas con cargo del dicho capitan se avia de quedar con la mitad de la cantidad que librava y en esta conformidad se entraron dentro los dichos soldados y fueron reziviendo los generos que el dicho capitan Esteban de Arce le dio por quenta de lo librado y vido este testigo que algunos que le pareze era la mayor cantidad de ellos sacaron en las manos mantas crudas”

[^19]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f. 3899r. “segun vido este testigo por dos vezes cantidad de tasajos a quien se la comprava el dicho capitan a razon de a peso cada arrova y despues la dav y cargava a los soldados a dos pesos la arrova con que tenia de aprovechamiento un pesso en cada arrova sin la demasia del peso y el mismo trato y contrato vido este testigo tubo con algunos yndios magabaligeros qye llevaban a bender dicha carne en la qual le valio al dicho capitan mucha cantidad de pessos en discurso del tiempo que estubo en dicho astillero.”

We do not need to multiply the examples. The pattern of corruption and abuse of official power for private gain is well substantiated and not at all uncommon. However, the narrative of the ensuing events is quite unusual, if one is to take José Martín Estrada’s deposition at face value, as it would not be out of place in a crime novel. Estrada declared to the judge that a slave belonging Esteban de Arce, called Esteban Logon and native from Caraga, had learned of a scheme in which Arce gave away 10 “picos o arrobas” of iron from China to the captain Juan de Espinosa, whether as a bribe or in exchange for money the witness cannot say. Estrada was told by another Spanish official, the *ayudante* Arias de Jirón, that Esteban Logon was repeatedly flogged by captain Arce for minor offenses. Apparently, the Caraga slave started threatening to blow the whistle and send word to Manila about the excessive abuses of the captain. Furthermore, he would accuse Esteban de Arce of having sexual relations with a married Visayan lady, Doña Juana Bangi: “The slave had said, ‘so bad my master flogs me, I will say to *Señoría* the iron he sold to give money to Doña Juana.’”[^20] This state of affairs continued for a few months, at which point José Martín de Estrada was summoned by Estebán de Arce and was told point blank to murder Logon:

[^20]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f. 4000v.: “Y habiendo dicho el esclavo, así mi amo me azota yo diré a señoría el hierro que a bendido para darle dineros a doña Juana.” The clumsy grammar and lack of prepositions is common in the declarations of slaves before court, and was also typical of how Spanish escribanos transcribed the speech of Sangley people. Señoría as a general term for a government official was also a very common usage.

>   “[Arce] said to this witness among other things, ‘this dog Estebanillo is going to sell me in Manila, so it would be good if nothing more is said about the people who have executed the death of Don Juan [Bangi, the husband of Arce’s alleged lover]; you will bring [Esteban Logon] to the captain Juan de Asiain to be put in the galleys, but upon leaving this shipyard must throw him into the sea with his shackles and all’, then [Arce] gave this witness a large jar to be filled with water, serving as a weight to sink the body after its death.”[^21]

[^21]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, ff.4000v-4001r.: “Llamó a este testigo dicho capitan Esteban de Arce y le dixo entre otras razones este perro de Estebanillo me a de bender en Manila y así será bien que se sepa nada de los demás que han tratado de la muerte de don Juan, y assimismo lo a de llevar diziendo que lo lleva a entregar al capitán Juan de Asiain para que lo embíe a galeras y en saliendo deste astillero lo a de echar con grillos y todo a la mar y le dio a este testigo una tinaja bacía para que la llenase de agua que sirviesse de pessa, para que con ella se fuesse a pique el cuerpo después de muerto.”

José Martín de Estrada excuses himself from blame by saying that he was too afraid to disobey his superior’s orders. As he puts it at the end of his deposition: “Just as he ordered to kill the slave, would he have ordered to kill fifty people, this witness would do it, because [Arce] was his superior and this way this witness could remain free of repercussions.”[^22] Estrada then narrates how the murder was carried out. He took Esteban Logon from the shipyard’s jail, where he was detained, and prepared to sail on a small boat, accompanied by three Visayan rowers, named “Francisco, native of Candaya, and the other Ropon, form the same village, and the other Juan Manboc, native of Abuyo in Leyte.” As they were leaving the shipyard’s dock, Estebán de Arce called him back to the beach and whispered into his ear: “Pay close attention and open your eyes in the execution of this killing, and to prove to me that the matter is settled in the fashion we discussed and agreed upon, you will cut his hand, which has three moles, and bring it back to me as notice and certification that the killing has been accomplished.”[^23] Then the boat departed and landed on a beach one and half *leguas* from the shipyard. Estrada explains that he was not the material author of the murder, because “he could not bear to be present in the execution of such cruelty.” Instead, he ordered the rowers, who were his servants, to execute Esteban Logon and bring back the proof that Arce had asked for. Upon his return to the shipyard, Estrada delivered the severed hand to Arce “placed in reed basket.” The captain embraced and thanked him profusely and gave three pesos and a blanket each to Francisco, Ropon and Juan Manboc, warning them to go to some place where nobody would recognize them. Estrada ends this part of his deposition complaining bitterly that at the end of the affair he was left without servants.

[^22]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f.xxx: “y assi como le mando matar al dicho su esclavo mandava matar a cinquenta personas lo hiciera este testigo asi por ser su superior como verse libre de sus rigores”

[^23]: AGI ESCRIBANIA 440C, f.4001v-4002r.: “Abiéndose embarcado este testigo con el dicho esclavo que se lo entregaron en el cuerpo de guardia y navegado poco trecho desde la playa muy apriessa, oyó este testigo que el dicho capitan Esteban de Arce le llamaba, y este testigo hizo bolver a tierra la embarcación en que yba y al oydo le dixo a este testigo ‘Vmd abra el ojo en la execucion desta muerte y para sertificarme de que la a obrado segun lo e dicho y emos tratado despues de muerto le a de cortar la mano que tiene tres lunares para que me sirva de avisso y certidumbre de que se a executado dicha muerte.’”
