---
title: "Chapter 6. The Galley System in the Philippines: Penal Slavery, Punishment and Urban Order"
---

6.1. Introduction
=================

In the recent historiography about global interaction during the early modern age, the history of Manila and the transpacific trade have achieved a prominent position. The city of Manila has become a sort of historiographical laboratory, from which is possible to analyse in detail the relation between global and local scales. It is often described as a privileged site for the observation and development of conceptual and methodological issues that surround the construction of global networks in early modernity. The attention of this historiography has focused mostly on the “silk-for-silver” trade, and therefore on the huge galleons that crossed the Pacific Ocean and carried out this exchange. Conversely, the galley squadrons of the Philippines, which were present in the archipelago for over three centuries, have not attracted nearly as much scrutiny.[^1] However, the galley as a warship, but most importantly as a penal institution, had a crucial role in the development of the Spanish presence in Southeast Asia. The galleys were not only a considerable chunk of the Philippine government’s naval power, they served as well as tool of social control and imposition of colonial order in Manila, a city marked by the ethnic diversity of its inhabitants, the demographic vulnerability of the Spanish component, and the frequency and ferocity of social conflicts.

[^1]: The only work of some extenson is Francisco Mallari, “The Spanish Navy in the Philippines, 1589-1787” en Philippine Studies, Vol. 37, 4 (Diciembre, 1989), pp. 412-439.

In this chapter, I will explore how the Mediterranean galley system was used as a critical element of social disciplining in Manila’s urban space and, more broadly, colonial rule in the Philippines. Galley servitude became one of the primary means of criminal punishment in the Philippines, and therefore an essential tool in the enforcement of legislation regarding crime, violence, vagrancy, gambling, homosexuality, and ethnic segregation. As I explored in chapter 3 and 4 of this thesis, the regulation of the number and place of residence of Chinese merchants and workers, as well as the spatial separation among the different social groups that populated Manila, were constant concerns for the Philippine authorities, although this policy of segregation was applied flexibly and intermittently. However, the concrete forms of punishment that imperial institutions employed to enforce the ordinances and royal orders concerning the spatial control of Manila’s population have not received enough scrutiny.

6.2. The Use of Galleys in the Philippines: Trade and War
================================================

The Spanish navy of the Philippines was formed out of the combination of sail ships (either of considerable size, like the galleons, or smaller, such as frigates and *pataches*) and rowing crafts, which included galleys, galliots, fustas and brigantine, built in the Mediterranean style, as well as models native to Southeast Asia, in particular *barangays*, *caracoas* and *virreyes*. This navy was the main tool of military projection of the Hispanic Monarchy in the region of the South China Seas, maintaining the supply lines that linked Manila with the Spanish settlements and fortified outposts in the Moluccan Islands, Taiwan and Mindanao. The galley began to be constructed during the Governorship of Francisco de Sande (1575-1580) and it remained in use well into the 18th century, when it was already in decline in the Mediterranean Sea.[^2] In other regions of the Hispanic Monarchy, such as the American shores of the Pacific Ocean, there were attempts to introduce galleys for the purpose of coast surveillance, but these projects never took hold.[^3] In the Caribbean space, in particular in Cartagena de Indias, the galley squadrons found more success and they were crucial in certain moments for the defence against corsairs. However, galleys were only present from 1578 to 1634.[^4] In summary, it can be argued that the Philippine Islands constitute the longest-lived instance of the use of galleys outside of the Mediterranean region.[^5]

[^2]: Still in 1770 we find mentions to the construction of galleys Ver AGI Filipinas 336, L.18, f.367v-369r. Mallari indicates that even in the 19th century there were galleys in operation. Find exact citation and quote.

[^3]: Silvio Zavala, “Galeras En El Nuevo Mundo,” Diálogos: Artes, Letras, Ciencias Humanas 13, no. 6 (78) (November 1, 1977), p. 10.

[^4]: David Wheat, “Mediterranean Slavery, New World Transformations: Galley Slaves in the Spanish Caribbean, 1578–1635,” Slavery & Abolition 31, no. 3 (September 1, 2010), p. 328; Silvio Zavala, “Galeras En El Nuevo Mundo,” p. 8.

[^5]:  

 

Galleys and galliots in Southeast Asia. Detail from *Carta Hydrográfica y Chorographica de las Yslas Filipinas*, hecho por Pedro Murillo Velarde y delineado por Nicolás de la Cruz, Manila, 1734, BNE MR/45/31.

The long life of the Philippine galleys may suggest that this type of craft adapted well to the maritime environment of Southeast Asia, offering a valid solution, if not completely adequate, to the military challenges faced by the Philippine Governors throughout the colonial period. Propulsion by means of oars allowed the galleys to travel relatively quickly even under adverse weather conditions, facing contrary winds and currents that sailships could generally not handle. [^6] Moreover, the galley’s long and narrow hull yielded a high degree of manoeuvrability and precision, permitting navigation on shallow reefs that were inaccessible to boats with rounder and deeper hulls. In a region like the Philippine archipelago and the Sulu Sea, with over seven thousand islands and numerous straits, it became necessary to rely on ships with the suitable combination of artillery and mobility, in order to guard the coasts, control sea-lanes, protect the ports and respond quickly to the threat posed by pirates. [^7]

[^6]: Ostwald Sales Colín, El Movimiento Portuario de Acapulco: El Protagonismo de Nueva España en la Relación con Filipinas, 1587-1648, Plaza y Valdes, Ciudad de México, 2000. [pp. 83-84, 89]

[^7]: Ana María Prieto Lucena, Las Filipinas durante el gobierno de Manrique Lara, 1653-1663, Escuela de Estudios Hispanoamericanos, Sevilla, 1984. [pp. 39-40].

A report produced in 1592 at the bequest of Governor Gómez Pérez das Mariñas indicates the importance of the galleys for the protection of the Spanish settlements at this early time in their history when the colony still consolidating. This document records the opinion of twenty-four “captains and people knowledgeable in military affairs” concerning the convenience of the galleys, which had been criticised from the pulpit of Manila’s *Iglesia Mayor* by the Franciscan fray Pedro Bautista. This priest decried the excessive demands imposed upon the native peoples of Luzon and the Visayas. The assessments were unanimously favourable, which is not at all surprising given that the Governor had commissioned the production of the document with a specific political purpose. Even so. For example, the *alguacil mayor* Francisco Rodríguez declared that “he is one of the first conquerors of these islands, and he has as a certain and settled fact that it is very convenient to have galleys for the defence of the many enemies that surround us, and even if the only advantage was the news that circulates throughout this archipelago that there are galleys, it would a very convenient thing and a deterrent for all.” In a similar vein, captains Luis Briceño and Francisco de Mezclado Andrada highlight the deterrent effect that the very name of the galleys would have over pirates and enemies: the simulation of strength thanks to the reputation garnered by the galleys is esteemed almost as highly as its actual military capabilities.

These remarks raise a number of interesting questions.

Almost every declarant mentions the danger of an attack from Japan, a serious concern for the colony at that moment in time. They argue that the galleys offered the best defensive chances. Several witnesses pointed to the successful performance of a single galley against a pirate group established in Cagayán, in the Northeast coast of Luzon. Juan de Alcega declared that “when the . The veiled threats transmitted by the emissaries of the shogun Hideyoshi never came to fruition, but the Governor did not underestimate the risk of a Japanese invasion, hurrying to reinforce Manila’s defences and complete the walled perimeter of the city. According to some declarants, building a galley squadron was as vital as the construction of walls. Captain Juan de Alcega stated that “the galleys are more important than the fence and other fortifications” as they are “fortresses of the sea, just like ones on the land (*de la mar fortalezas como las de la tierra*).”

Unlike the Caribbean galleys, the majority of which were built in the Mediterranean and brought to the Americas through the Atlantic, the Philippine galleys were constructed in Asian shipyards, using local materials of better quality and lower price.[^8] In 1606, the Governor Pedro de Acuña stated that with twenty thousand pesos it would be possible to sustain four or five galleys in the Philippines, “which is the same that a galley costs in Cartagena.” [^9] Even so, the money spent in the galley system (around 45,000 pesos each year, according to Juan Grau de Monfalcon) was a considerable burden for the Philippine royal treasury. [^10] The galley squadrons consisted of six ships, in which served 1,080 rowers. However, very often only a fraction of the crafts was in a condition to navigate, due to the lack of repairs, oarsmen and trained officials.[^11] The figures given by Juan Grau included only the sums employed for salary and provisioning of sailors, officials and rowers, but did not count construction and repair costs. In the same document, Grau indicates that the building and supply of the navy mounted to over 280,000 pesos each year. Out of this expenditure, it is hard to say how much it went to the construction of galleys, a fraction that would probably vary substantially depending on the particular context. In any case, the expenses in cash, labour and materials consumed by the galleys were difficult to absorb by a treasury in chronic deficit, which relied on the Mexican *situados* to finance the Hispanic imperial enterprise in Asia.[^12]

[^8]: Wheat, “Mediterranean Slavery, New World Transformations.” P. 329. Regarding naval construction in the Philippines see María Fernanda G. de los Arcos, “La Construcción de Los Galeones Transpacíficos: Una Historia Social,” Perspectivas Históricas, no. 1–3 (1997): 37. Andrew Christian Peterson, Making the First Global Trade Route: The Southeast Asian Foundations of the Acapulco-Manila Galleon Trade, 1519-1650, Doctoral Thesis, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, 2014.

[^9]: “Capítulos de carta de Acuña sobre galeras”, 8 de julio de 1606, AGI Filipinas 19, R.7, N.103: que es lo mismo que gasta en Cartagena una galera.

[^10]: Juan Grau y Monfalcón, “Memorial dado al Rey en su Real Consejo de Indias…” 1637, Colección de documentos inéditos relativos al descubrimiento…, vol. 6, Ministro de Ultramar, Madrid, 1868. [pp. 421-422].

[^11]: MM

[^12]: Leslie E Bauzon, Deficit Government: Mexico and the Philippine Situado, 1606-1804, Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies, Tokyo, 1981. About the fiscal system of the Spanish Philippines, the most important work is Luis Alonso Álvarez, El costo del imperio asiático: la formación colonial de las islas Filipinas bajo dominio español, 1565-1800, Instituto Mora, México, 2009. Álvarez challenges Leslie Bauzon’s interpretation, stressing that the fiscal burden shouldered by indio populations were considerably higher than what the official sources suggest. Alonso also argues that Mexican situados were not as crucial as Bauzon claims.

Therefore, it is not surprising that numerous contemporary observers judged that the galleys did not constitute an efficient use of the limited resources that the Governors had at their disposal. In 1606, the bishop of Nueva Segovia, Diego de Soria, wrote that “the galleys that are here consume this land and are of no advantage at all, nor have they done anything against the Dutch enemies because they cannot chase their ships in open seas; against other enemies of this land that use small boats called *caracoas*, they cannot follow them because of the shallows that abound here.”[^13] In his paper, *The Spanish Navy in the Philippines*, the Philippine historian Francisco Mallari detailed the continuous problems faced by the Spanish navy to put a stop to the raids launched from the sultanates of Mindanao, Jolo and Brunei. [^14] The Philippine galleys were too slow and heavy to give chase to the fast *caracoa*, which was an extremely light craft, MISSING SOME DESCRIPTION. As the priest xxx Combés wrote in his *Historia de las islas de Mindanao, Joló y sus adyacentes*, “the care and study that governs their construction makes their ships fast as birds; and ours by comparison slow as lead.”[^15] In a direct battle, the heavier firepower carried by the galleys gave them a substantial advantage. However, the *caracoa* fleets tended to avoid open battles, preferring to raid coastal populations and quickly escape, loaded with captives and loot, well before the Spanish navy could catch up. In sum, the advantages that the galley had in respect to high board ships were nullified when confronted with the type of naval warfare prevalent in Southeast Asia.[^16]

[^13]: “Carta del obispo de Nueva Segovia Diego de Soria, sobre varios asuntos” 2 de julio de 1606, AGI FILIPINAS 76 N.58: Las galeras que aquí ay consumen esta tierra y no son de ningún provecho ni an hecho cosa de consideración porque contra los enemigos olandeses no se pueden enmarar y contra otros enemigos desta tierra que andan en navíos pequeños que llaman caracoas no los puede seguir por los bajos que ay muchos.

[^14]: Francisco Mallari, “The Spanish Navy in the Philippines, 1589-1787,” Philippine Studies 37, no. 4 (December 1, 1989), pp. 422-435.

[^15]: Francisco Combés. Historia De Las Islas De Mindanao: Iolo, Y Sus Adyacentes. Progressos De La Religion, Y Armas Catolicas. Por los herederos de Pablo de Val, a costa de L. de Ibarra, Madrid, 1667 [p. 43]: (El) cuidado y estudio que govierna sus fábricas haze que salga dellas pájaros sus navíos; y que a su respecto queden los nuestros de plomo.

[^16]: Francisco Mallari, “The Spanish Navy in the Philippines, 1589-1787,” p. 429.

The renown cosmographer and polymath, Hernando de los Ríos Coronel, tried to solve this dilemma through the adaptation of the Mediterranean galley to the specific challenges posed by South-east Asian warships. In a memorial presented before the Council of Indies in 1607, Hernando de los Ríos put forward a new ship design, probably inspired by the *sampan* and other models used in the South China seas, that sought to increase the speed and manoeuvrability of the galley, while maintaining superior firepower. The Philippine shipyards produced a variety of rowing crafts, from small galliots of 12 banks to great galleys of 29 banks. De los Rios’ model, on the other hand, only had seven rowing banks. According to him, this ship could navigate contrary winds and currents thanks to its oars, besides being “so fast with the sail that no ship can escape her.” Moreover, it carried enough artillery to “undo any of the ships that are used by the enemies of these islands.” Its construction would only cost 250 ducats and the upkeep would be notably reduced because it carried only a third of the rowers needed to man a medium-sized galley. Likewise, the substitution of the galleys for smaller and cheaper ships would enhance the preparation of the transpacific galleons. Hernando de los Ríos stated that “it is impossible to sustain and keep the provision of the *naos* of the route of these islands with New Spain as it should because the officials are occupied with the construction and provision of the galleys.” King Phillip III backed the proposal of Hernando de los Ríos and instructed the Philippine Governor to carry out a careful revision of the naval policy employed to push back the assaults of mindanaos, jolos and camucones. However, De los Ríos project never came to fruition and the Philippine shipyards continued to produce galleys and galliots in the traditional manner.

The galleys also played a crucial role in the interregional commerce, acting as trade ships but, more importantly, protecting routes and ports of trade. The circulation of supplies between Manila and the *presidios* of the Moluccas, Taiwan and Mindanao was accompanied by a significant commercial exchange, usually carried illicitly by the general of the navy. As Francisco Mallari points out . [^17] For example, the *maestre de campo* Pedro de Heredia, Governor of the Terrenate fort from 1624 to 1632, was accused of creating a big business out of the clandestine traffic of spices, hidden among the supplies transported by the galleys.[^18] Through this and other illicit means, Pedro de Heredia amassed a substantial fortune, calculated by observers at 400,000 pesos. Sebastián Hurtado de Corcuera wrote to the king “that he (Pedro de Heredia) is accustomed to say among the soldiers that he has 30,000 pesos to close one eye of any governor who shall send to take his residencia, and, if it should be necessary, as many more pesos to close the other eye; but he has found the door to this shut.”[^19]

[^17]: Ibid, p. 419.

[^18]: Gary William Bohigian, Life on the rim of Spain’s Pacific Empire: Presidio society in the Molucca Islands, 1606-1663. Tesis doctoral, University of California Los Angeles, 1994 [pp. 234-238]

[^19]: B&R XXVI, p. 315.

The correspondence of Jerónimo de Silva, Governor of Terrenate (1612-1617), often refers to the importance of the galley squadron for the facilitation of interregional commerce. The galleys participated assiduously, not only in the connection between the Moluccas and Manila but also in the trading circuits that linked Ternate and Tidore with Makassar and other Malay port-cities.[^20] Moreover, the galleys acted escorts for the transpacific galleons, providing logistical support once they arrived at the Philippine archipelago. Jerónimo de Bañuelos y Carrillos observed in 1638 that “it is essential that there would be four or six galleys at all times, for the punishment of the Dutch, as well as for whatever else could happen to us, for they are of no little avail for the ships that come from New Spain, that very often would be lost, because of the strong currents, if the galleys would not tow them.”[^21] This role as tow boats is an interesting and unexplored aspect of the versatile performance of the Philippine galleys, which as we can see supported Manila’s trade in multiple fashions.

[^20]: This quote might serve as an example: “La galera hizo un viaje a la isla de Manados que es en la de Macasar, a rescatar algún bastimento con la ropa que había en estos reales almacenes. “Carta de Jerónimo de Silva a don Juan de Silva”” 3 de julio de 1614, in *Colección de documentos inéditos para la historia de España*, vol. 52, Madrid, 1868 [p. 223].

[^21]: Jerónimo de Bañuelos y Carrillos, Tratado del estado de las Islas Philipinas y de sus conueniencias, imprenta de Bernardo Calderón, Ciudad de México, 1638, BNE, R/33148. F.16r.

    *Importará mucho que Su Magestad mande que aya quatro o seis galeras, así para castigo del olandés, como para otra cualquiera cosa que nos suceda, pues no son de poco provecho para las naos que vienen de la Nueva España; pues muchas veces se perdieran, por las grandes corrientes, si ellas no las sacaran a remolque.*

Direct commercial involvement was not the main duty of the galleys. The protection of routes and ports was their primary purpose. This was particularly visible in the Moluccan region, an area of great economic importance because of the clove and mace production. In 1611, Jerónimo de Silva remarked that the capture of a galley by Ternatans posed enormous difficulties for maritime circulation between the islands. Silva noted that “we could not hinder them because they took the galley, with which they made great harm, because if it was in our power they would not have captured four *champanes* of supplies and other things they brought for this camp, which has given them great advantage and us great harm and necessity.”[^22] Not in vain, Jerónimo de Silva referred to the galleys as the “hands and feet of these islands” (*los pies y manos de estas islas*).[^23] On May 17th of 1618, the king of Tidore sent a letter to the Governor Alonso Fajardo de Tenza asking for a fleet of three of four galleys to be sent in order to protect the Spanish interests in the Moluccas. The letter warned that “we cannot have communication between one island and another” without a sufficient galley presence since these ships are “the helpers of all dangers” (*las socorredoras de los peligros*).[^24] In sum, although the galleys were not effective as a deterrent against mindanao and jolo raiders, they proved crucial for buttressing the fragile Spanish presence in the Moluccan *presidios*, from which a substantial quantity of spices was sent to Manila and other Southeast Asian ports, especially Makassar.

[^22]: Colección de documentos inéditos para la historia de España, vol. 52, Madrid, 1868 [p. 27].

    *Que no se les podía estorbar por tener tomada la galera con la cual hacían mucho daño, porque si estuviera en el nuestro poder, no hubieran tomado cuatro champanes de bastimentos y cosas que traían para este campo, que les ha hecho mucho al caso y a nosotros mucho daño y necesidad.*

[^23]: Ibid, p. 382.

[^24]: “Traslado de una carta del Rey de Tidore”, 7 de mayo de 1618, AGI Filipinas 7, R.5, N.7.

    *No pueden tener comunicación unas yslas y fuerzas a otras* (ADD THE REST OF THE QUOTE).

     

6.3. The Provision of Oarsmen: Levies, Punishment and Penal Servitude
=====================================================================

The religious orders frequently censored and impeded the coercive recruitment of rowers among the populations of Luzon and the Visayas. The enlistment of oarsmen as *buenas boyas*, (that is, salaried and theoretically voluntaries) soon found its limits in the Philippines, due to the appalling life conditions suffered at the rowing bank. Moreover, service in the navy implied long months away from their native villages, causing disruption in the rural economy and society. In 1582, Bishop Domingo de Salazar sent to the Council of Indies a bitter indictment of the abuses suffered by the *indios* of the Spanish Philippines, highlighting in particular naval service.

>   Because of the many occupations forced upon the *indios*, like throwing them into the rows of galleys and frigates (…) and sometimes they go so far that they are away four and six months. (…) When a long voyage is made, they receive many grievances: one is sending a sailor without Christian piety and respect to haul the *indios* that are necessary to row in the galleys, without considering whether the man is married or single, or if his wife or children might be ill, but rather like cattle, he takes them all; and it happens that the wife follows the husband sobbing and begging for the man to be let go; that she has nobody to look after her, and they (the conscription officials) give her a beating so she leaves; other times they leave the woman for dead and make the husbands go rowing, and they toss them (the *indios*) under shackles in the galleys and they whip them as if they were convicted or sentenced.[^25]

[^25]: Domingo de Salazar, “Relación de las cosas de Filipinas,” 1583, in Wenceslao E. Retana, Archivo del bibliófilo filipino, vol. 3, 1897 [p. 3-4]:

    >   *Por las muchas ocupaciones en que ocupan a los yndios, como es echarlos a los remos de galeras y fregatas (…) y a las veces van tan lexos, que están allá cuatro y seis meses. (……) Cuando se a de haçer una jornada larga, son muchos los agravios que reçiben: uno que es enviar a sacar los yndios que son menester para remar en una galera o fregata a un marinero sin piedad ni respecto christiano, y otra es pública, y sin mirar si es casado ni soltero, ni si tiene a su muger mala o los hijos, sino arreo, los lleva todos; y a acontecido traerle a la muger el marido y venir ella la barriga a la boca llorando que se lo dexen; que no tiene quien mire por ella, y dalle de palos que se vaya, y al pobre marido hacelle yr mal que le pese; a otros aconteçe dexar a sus mugeres á la muerte y haçer ir a los maridos a remar, y los echan con hierros en las galeras y los açotan como si fueran forçados o sentenciados.*

A memorial written by Franciscan priests in 1580 contends that the Crown officials behaved with *indio* oarsmen “not as Christians but rather as cruel tyrants, whipping them, calling them dogs and other ugly words, pulling them by force and giving them very little pay and sometimes none, (…) under the guise that it is for the King and that they represent the royal person, and because there is nobody to oppose them, blinded by their own interests, they destroy the land and are a grave impediment for the conversion of souls.”[^26] In a similar vein, Hernando de los Ríos argued that one of the main advantages of his scheme was a substantial reduction in the demand for rowers. This would help to alleviate “the troubles suffered by the natives because they were badly paid and mistreated and made to leave their wife and children, starving to death and losing crops.”[^27] In sum, the recourse to violence and forced dispossession exerted upon *indio* villages to feed the military-logistical system was highly contested and generated tensions between religious authorities and the secular government.

[^26]: “Relación de franciscanos sobre la evangelización de Filipinas,” 1580, AGI Filipinas 84, N.13:

    *No como cristianos sino como crueles tiranos, azotándolos, llamándolos perros y otras palabras feas, llevándolos por fuerza y dándoles muy poca paga y a veces ninguna, (…) devaxo de color que es para el Rey y que ellos representan la persona real, como no ay quien les vaya a la mano ciegos de sus propios intereses destruyen la tierra y son gravíssimo impedimento para la conversión de las ánimas.*

[^27]: “Petición de informe sobre fabricar navíos pequeños,” 30 de agosto de 1608, AGI Filipinas 340, L.3, f. 49v.

    *Las molestias que recivían los naturales porque eran mal pagados y maltratados y los obligavan a dejar sus mujeres e hijos, muriendo de ambre y perdiéndose* [sementeras.](scrivcmt://4B799D0F-44F6-485B-8D92-9D42DEF6DD74)

There was another, more practical reason that advised against the use of native oarsmen, generally for a single season: the inevitable lack continuity and experience of the *chusma*. In 1603, Pedro de Acuña complained about the lack of skill (*poca destreza*) of the *buenas boyas* oarsmen. According to Acuña, “every time that galleys are deployed, they were manned by *indios*, who are recent recruits, unschooled at the oar, (…) when they finish the voyage and they have finally learned something they are released; when it is time again to bring out (the galleys), they (the previous governors) had to go and find other people who do not know how to row.”[^28] The lack of expert rowers was a great obstacle for the correct functioning of the galleys. Their propulsion demanded of the oarsmen a high degree of strength, endurance, coordination and skill, abilities that were only honed after years of practice.[^29] The movement sequence applied in the Mediterranean galley was highly specific and diverged considerably from the rowing style typical of Southeast Asian crafts. Acuña pointed out that Philippine oarsmen “do not know how to to xxx.”[^30] This speaks to one fundamental difference between Mediterranean and Southeast Asian rowing crafts: in the *bangka* or *caracoa*, oarsmen paddled facing in the direction that boat was travelling; in the galleys

[^28]: “Carta de Pedro de Acuña sobre varios asuntos,” 18 de diciembre de 1603, AGI Filipinas 7, R.1, N.8.

    *Cada vez que se armavan (galeras) hasta que yo vine, era de indios y como gente nueba y mal platica de bogar; (…) quando acavavan el viage y havían aprendido algo los despedían y tornaban; quando otra vez se ofrecía a salir fuera a buscar otros que tampoco savían bogar.*

[^29]: Paul Walden Bamford, Fighting Ships and Prisons: The Mediterranean Galleys of France in the Age of Louis XIV, University of Minnesota Press, 1973 [p. 221]; Wheat, “Mediterranean Slavery, New World Transformations,” p. 330.

[^30]: “Carta de Pedro de Acuña sobre varios asuntos,” 18 de diciembre de 1603, AGI Filipinas 7, R.1, N.8.

    *No savían montar en la peana ni caer en el banco con el remo como hacen todas las galeotas y galeras, bogavan sentados en el banco como bergantines y la boga tan espesa que no podían hacer fuerza*.

As happened with the Spanish galleys of the Mediterranean, in the second half of the 16th century the proportion of slaves and convicts in the *chusma* grew until surpassing the number salaried oarsmen. Pedro de Acuña, in the same document quoted above, explained how the galley system could be maintained without overburdening the communities of Luzon and the Visayas, or at least reducing as far as possible their contribution, something that the prior Governor, Francisco Tello, had declared all but impossible. Acuña wrote: “With the *chusma* that has been gathered from people that were roaming free in the islands, those who were brought from New Spain, and the Mindanaos that were captured, I have manned the old galliot that I found here, and with the Camucones and other delinquents of this land, and those that were brought in these ships.”[^31] Acuña adds that the convicts from New Spain and “the Spaniards that the justice of these islands condemns”[^32] could form a core force of long-term service and accumulated experience, forming a group of “old oarsmen (*bogavantes*)[^33] that will teach those from here.” In conclusion, Acuña argued that the difficulty for the provision of oarsmen had been exaggerated in the reports to the King, because “knowing how to search, there is no lack of *chusma*” (*Sabiendo buscar, la chusma no falta*). He claimed that combining the forces from war captures, the purchase of slaves for the King’s service, the arrival of convicts (*forzados*) from Mexico, and judicial punishmene of Spaniards as well as Indios from the Philippines, the galleys would be comfortably supplied with labour. However, this assessment was put to the test numerous times, when the lack of oarsmen forced Manila’s citizens to send to the galleys their personal slaves.[^34]

[^31]: “Carta de Pedro de Acuña sobre varios asuntos,” 18 de diciembre de 1603, AGI Filipinas 7, R.1, N.8.

    *Con la chusma que se a recogido de la que andava suelta por las islas, y la que se trujo el año pasado de Nueva España y los mindanaos que se tomaron tengo armada la galeota vieja que aquí halle, y con los camucones y otros delinquentes desta tierra y los que tambien an traydo estos navios.*

[^32]: “Carta de Pedro de Acuña sobre varios asuntos,” 18 de diciembre de 1603, AGI Filipinas 7, R.1, N.8.

    *los españoles que las justicias destas islas condenavan (FIND MISSING BIT) bogavantes viejos que enseñaran a los de acá.*

[^33]: In the Scaloccio method, bogavantes were the oarsmen closest the end of the row. They marked rowing rhythm and speed, and were always the most skilled and experienced oarsmen. See Pedro Fondevila Silva, “xxx”, Revista de Historia Naval, p. 26.

[^34]: FIND CITATION

Pedro de Acuña had been the Governor of Cartagena de Indias, prior to his tenure in the Philippines.

In any case, Acuña’s letter indicates that the dispatch of convicts from New Spain was a key mechanism for the settlement and defence of the Asian frontier from an early time. Two recent important books have underscored the significance of the convict circulation for the construction of the Portuguese and Dutch empires in Asia during the 16th and 17th centuries.[^35] In the case of the Philippines, we have the works of Eva Maria Mehl and Maria Fernanda García de los Arcos, focused on the period after the Seven Years’ War (1756-1763), and Stephanie Mawson, whose contribution centres mainly on the second half of the 17th century.[^36] According to Mawson, “the development and extension of convict transportation during the seventeenth century served two purposes; it was both a reaction to the imperative of maintaining the Spanish imperial project in the Pacific and functioned as a criminal justice measure in response to the emergence of an unruly and disobedient plebeian underclass in the cities and along the highways of New Spain.[^37]” This mechanism of “social cleansing”[^38] through military service in the Asian frontier of the Hispanic Monarchy led Vittorio Ricci to describe the Philippines as “the galleys of New Spain,” populated by “the thieves, the scoundrels, the restless, the exiled, the apostates, and whoever has bad blood and worse deeds.[^39]” Rowing in the galleys, as well as forced labour in the foundries, military construction projects and hospitals (this last one a sentence commonly applied to women), served the same purpose within the islands than the Philippines served in relation to New Spain: a form of judicial punishment and exile that also exercised important strategic functions for the Crown.

[^35]: Kerry Ward, Networks of Empire: Forced Migration in the Dutch East India Company, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New York, 2009; Timothy J. Coates, Convicts and Orphans: Forced and State-Sponsored Colonizers in the Portuguese Empire, 1550-1755, Stanford University Press, Stanford, 2001.

[^36]: María Fernanda García de los Arcos, Forzados y reclutas: Los criollos novohispanos en Asia, 1756-1808, Portrerillos Editores, Ciudad de México, 1996; Eva Maria Mehl, The Spanish Empire and the Pacific World: Mexican ‘vagrants, idlers, and troublemakers’ in the Philippines, 1765-1821, Tesis doctoral, University of California Davis, 2011; Stephanie Mawson, “Unruly Plebeians and the Forzado System: Convict Transportation between New Spain and the Philippines during the Seventeenth Century” Revista de Indias, vol. 73, n. 253, pp. 693-731.

[^37]: Stephanie Mawson, “Unruly Plebeians” p. 694.

[^38]: FIND MAWSON’S CITATION ABOUT SOCIAL CLEANSING.

[^39]: Vittorio Ricci, “Discurso y parecer en que se demuestra que no conviene que la nación de China que llaman sangleyes habite ni viva de asiento en las islas Filipinas” 25 de marzo de 1677, AGI FILIPINAS 28, N. 131, f.994r.

    *Las galeras de Nueva España (FIND THE MISSING BIT) los ladrones, los facinerosos, los inquietos, los expulsos, los apóstatas y cuantos hay de mala sangre y peores hechos.*

Commonplace abuse and terrible living conditions made mutinies a constant danger. Governor Francisco de Sande warned of this peril already in 1576: “I would not dare relying on the oarsmen of these islands, as we have so few Spanish men in the galleys that it would possible for the *indios* to escape and make evil deeds.[^40]” This foreboding came true with the death of Governor Gómez Pérez das Mariñas, who died along with dozens of other Spaniards, during a mutiny of Chinese rowers that occurred on October 25th of 1593. While he prepared a military expedition to the Moluccas Islands, Gómez Pérez das Mariñas had to deal with the perennial problems of providing oarsmen and sailors for the navy. The religious orders decried the fact that Gómez Pérez Dasmariñas was buying *indio* slaves in order to man the rowing benches, and they managed to block this policy.[^41] Mariñas then decided to force 250 Chinese of Manila to row in the *galera capitana* of the navy. Antonio de Morga wrote that the Chinese oarsmen received a generous wage and were treated with dignity and consideration, an appraisal that is contradicted by the accounts found in Chinese sources, studied by Berthold Laufer and José Eugenio Borao.[^42] These sources point to the brutality suffered by the conscripted men as the trigger for the mutiny, which agrees with Bartolomé de Argensola’s account, and even with the *relación* of Luis Pérez das Mariñas, son of the murdered Governor. Das Mariñas wrote shortly after the events that Gómez Pérez had promised to the conscripted Chinese that they would receive honourable treatment, without using the whip and the irons, trying to appease and silence the complaints of the Manila Chinese. However, once the galley was far away from the port, Gómez Pérez Dasmariñas planned to shackle the oarsmen to the rowing benches: “I know that my father intended, when they left Manila, not to trust them and put them under irons, because he carried in the galley a thicket (*ramada*) of five chains per bench.[^43]”

[^40]: “Carta de Sande sobre corsario Limajón, reino de Taibin, etc.” 6 de junio de 1676, AGI Filipinas 6, R.3, N.26, f.10r.

    De remeros para esta tierra no me osaría servir, aviendo tan poca gente como ay agora de galeotes españoles, porque sería en su mano huyrse un día y hazer una maldad.

[^41]: Find the source where this issue is explained —\> One of the letter of Mariñas. Complement maybe with some religious orders’ letters.

[^42]: Add Morga’s citation

    Berthold Laufer, “The Relations of the Chinese to the Philippine Islands,”” in Dennis O. Flynn, Arturo Giráldez, James Sobredo (eds.), European Entry to the Pacific, Ashgate, Aldershot, U.K., 2001 [p. 68-82]; José Eugenio Borao, “Massacre of 1603””, p. 3-4.

[^43]: “Carta de Luis P. Mariñas sobre muerte de su padre,” 15 de enero de 1594, AGI FILIPINAS 18B, R.4, N.24.

    *Sé que llevaba intención mi padre en alejándose de Manila no fiarse dellos i echarlos hierros, que allí los llevaba en la galera una ramada de cinco cadenas por banco.*

The 1593 mutiny has been interpreted as a key moment in the long history of suspicion and conflict between Chinese and Spanish in Manila, which reached a breaking point during the great conflagration of 1603. The already cited article by José Eugenio Borao analysed in detail this event, which I already discussed in chapter 4, so I will limit my remarks here to its immediate consequences. One of them was the enslavement of 597 survivors of the bloody repression, 266 of which were sent to the galleys. The diplomatic correspondence established between the Philippine government and the Chinese imperial authorities in the period following the massacre highlights the lack of political support and legal protection suffered by the Chinese migrants to Manila. Although the Chinese authorities reprimanded the Philippine Governor (referred to in Chinese sources as an independent petty king) and demanded the return of goods and money seized during the repression, the Ming emperor xxx decided against forcefully defending the rights of Chinese workers and merchants settled in the Philippines. He estimated that they were not truly subjects of the Middle Kingdom, but rather liable to the laws and judicial practice of the land where they lived and traded. The penalty of slavery applied to the survivors, therefore, was deemed legitimate and tolerated, albeit with some reluctance. The religious orders did not vouch either for the *sangleys* condemned to forced labour, as they generally considered the “infidel Chinese” as a foreign element that could contaminate and pervert the fragile process of conversion of the Philippines *naturales*. For the most part, the Manila Chinese were not included within the legal category of *indios naturales* of Luzon and the Visayas, so their enslavement in a “just war,” as punishment for the rebellion, was better established juridically than the forced recruitment of *indios*, a political expedient that was questionable in legal and religious terms.

A report produced by the *contador* of the royal treasury in 1605 allows us to see with some detail the social and ethnic composition of galley rowers in the period right after the 1603 revolt. The four galleys active at that moment employed a total of 570 oarsmen, of which almost half (46,7%) were termed “Sangleys of the uprising” (*sangleyes del alzamiento*). The set of Spanish and Indian *forzados* added up to 215 individuals (37,8%). The report also indicates the presence of four Japanese *forzados*. Twenty-four mindanaos and sixty-one King’s slaves (*esclavos del rey*) completed the rowing crew.

|                  | Forzados españoles | Forzados indios | Mindanaos | Esclavos del Rey | Sangleyes del alzamiento | Japones forzados | Total |
|------------------|--------------------|-----------------|-----------|------------------|--------------------------|------------------|-------|
| Galera capitana  | 37                 | 31              | 10        | 32               | 86                       | 1                | 197   |
| Galera patrona   | 30                 | 32              | 5         | 3                | 57                       | 0                | 127   |
| Galera San Juan  | 11                 | 12              | 0         | 21               | 75                       | 3                | 122   |
| Galera San Pedro | 24                 | 38              | 9         | 5                | 48                       | 0                | 129   |
| Total            | 102                | 113             | 24        | 61               | 266                      | 4                | 570   |

Table 1. List of rowers. FILIPINAS 19, R.6, N.93 "Carta del contador Artiz sobre servicio en galeras" (1605)

One might wonder whether this great increase in the number of oarsmen, due to the revolt’s repression, helped to consolidate the expansion of the galley system carried under Governor Acuña. Three years after the revolt, Acuña prepared the most powerful Spanish navy seen up to that point in the Philippines. It included five galleons, six galleys, three galliots, fourteen frigates (“seven of His Majesty, and seven of private citizens”), plus a diverse set of boats for logistical support, adding up to 36 vessels. This expedition had the goal of retaking the Portuguese fortress of Ternate and expelling the Dutch from the Moluccas Islands. As we have seen, the lack of oarsmen was one of the main limiting factors for the galley system’s operation, in the Philippines as well as in the Mediterranean. The growth of the *chusma*, added to the formation of a group of expert oarsmen (constituted by Spanish and Indio *forzados*, as well as New Spain’s convicts) and the enhancement of technical knowledge for the construction and performance of galleys, allowed to strengthen the galley system in this critical conjuncture.[^44]

[^44]: La fuerza de remeros citada en 1605 fue completada en vistas a la ofensiva contra Terrenate mediante el reclutamiento de 649 bogadores tagalos y pampangos. La información sobre la armada procede de Bartolomé Leonardo de Argensola, Conquista de las islas Malucas, Polifemo, Madrid, 2009 [1609], pp. 321-322.

6.4. The 1651 List of *Forzados y Esclavos de Galera*
=====================================================

In this section, I will focus on a list produced in 1651, which gives us detailed information on 1,013 individuals condemned to the galleys and forced labour from 1644 to 1649. The list includes the convicts’ ethnic origin, the crime allegedly committed and the sentence imposed upon them. This document indicates with more precision the social background of the forzados and the transgressions typically punished with galley slavery. This allows us to look into some aspects of the social world of Manila that are difficult to gauge through the official correspondence. From a broader perspective, this revealing source brings to focus how the legal and political apparatus that defined the “proper” norms of residence and behaviour for the population of the Spanish Philippines, allowed, in turn, the violent incorporation of hundreds of people each year to the military and logistic system of the Hispanic Monarchy.

Before analysing with more detail this document, it is necessary to situate the source in its historical and textual context. The list occupies 87 folios in the lengthy juicio de residencia of Manuel Estacio Venegas, the subject of chapter 5. The list is a notarized copy (traslado) from the Contaduría records, included in the trial of Estacio Venegas as processual evidence. The charge 14 of Estacio’s accusation accuses him of sending 311 people to the galleys, ignoring proper judicial procedure (”without xxx”). The sentence orders to give the name and physical characteristics of the people wrongfully condemned so they could regain their freedom.

We found the proceedings of a sentence applied to two large group of sangleyes, formed by 150 and 138 people, with the succinct description that they were condemned on account of “living in the lands of Nabotas.” This place was located to the north of Manila, in Tondo’s jurisdiction, where in principle Chinese people were forbidden to reside. However, much Chinese were established along the Northern coast of Manila Bay, many of them fishermen, mixing with the local population. As we have seen, Spanish authorities lacked the means or inclination to evict these groups and reduce them to the Parian, as numerous royal orders and municipal ordinances insisted. In moments of acute necessity, as undoubtedly were the years from 1641 to 1648, when the city was under constant pressure from the Dutch fleets, royal officials used residential laws in order to supply with labour the logistical and military apparatus, whether in construction works, foundries or, in this case, the galleys. The VOC’s offensive against Manila, which reached its culmen in 1646-1648, might have been the reason for this indiscriminate roundup of hundreds of people at a time. Manuel Estacio Venegas, as the right-hand man of the Governor, had an important role in the organisation of the city’s defence (although not so much in combat), and his xxx. It is noteworthy that many of the crimes that show up in the list (gambling, lack of residential licenses, homosexuality) were punished in another occasion with monetary fines rather that forced labour, as Juan Gil has shown.

Apart from these two large groups, 178 people were sent to the galley for transgressing residential regulations. For example, on December 31st of 1645, nine *sangleyes*[^45] were punished because they lived in Balayan province. The proceedings state that “all of them will be placed in deposit with all the rest of *forzados de galera* while the *alcalde mayor* of Balayan sends written testimony of how the order was published in his province that all the *sangleyes* must be lodged in their Parian.[^46]” Another group of 27 Chinese were condemned on account of being “caught living in the province of Laguna de Bay.[^47]” On the other hand, two Sangleys, whose name was not registered, were sentenced because they were living “within the walls of this city.[^48]” Another entry proclaims that it was “forbidden that any Black slave or mulatto, Japanese, Mestizo nor Indian would walk around at night in the streets of this city.” As we can gauge from this registry, both establishing residence in the provinces and dwelling within Intramuros (particularly at night) could carry a sentence of labour in the galley, in general of four years without pay.

[^45]: Checo, from Santou, 34 years old; Oson, Tanua, 32; Yausan, Tanua, 35; Ayco, Chentau, 33; Lahura, Tanua, 40; Paguio, Emuy, 30; Samben, Tanua, 30; Chite, Emuy, 25; Juan V., Tanua, 40. Santou, Tanua, y Emuy refer to the Chinese cities Sandu, Tongan y Xiamen, respectively. Chentau perhaps refers to Zhangzhou. See Lucille Chia, “The Butcher, the Baker, and the Carpenter: Chinese Sojourners in the Spanish Philippines and Their Impact on Southern Fujian (Sixteenth-Eighteenth Centuries),” *Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient* 49, no. 4 (2006), p. 521.

[^46]: *A todos (…) tendrá en depósito con los demás forsados de galeras hasta tanto que el alcalde mayor de Balayan embíe testimonio de cómo se publicó el vando en su provincia para que todos los sangleyes se reduxesen a su Parian*

[^47]: *Porque fueron cogidos viviendo en la provincia de Laguna de Bay.*

[^48]: *Por vivir dentro de los muros de esta ciudad*

The Philippine *naturales* were also subject to mobility and residential restrictions, with the specific purpose of reducing them to their native villages so they would contribute to the royal treasury in the form of the *tributo real*, as well as other types of fiscal exaction such as the *polo y bandala*. For example, seven Pampango men (Agustin Pangilinan, Alonso Garcia, Matheo Salamat, Pedro Calivin, Agustin Mosnig, Juan Libang and Pedro Simeon) were punished for contravening a decree issued by the Governor that commanded that "all *indios* whether *naturales* (native to Manila) or Pampangos, as well as women who are in this city and its surroundings, have fifteen days to return to their native villages so can pay their *tributos* and turn up to the *polo y servicio*. This offence appears repeatedly in the records, and it's accompanied in each case by the following sentence: "Punishment of four years rowing in the galleys without pay; and in the case of the women, have their hair shaved and serve in the royal hospital for four years."

Gambling seemed to have been punished quite intensely. On April 7th of 1645, six sangleys were condemned after being "apprehended playing different games at night (...) in the Parian de los Sangleyes in the room of a house that they say belong to the admiral Don Fernando Galindo." This quote gives us a clue on the participation of the members of the Spanish elite in the big business that gambling moved in Manila. Although, as we saw in chapter 3, gambling was portrayed in numerous Spanish sources as a deplorable feature typical of Chinese people, games of chance were pastimes enjoyed by people of all ethnic and social backgrounds. However, the practice of gambling appears frequently related to vagrancy and a licentious lifestyle of marginal individuals. Luis Benco was sentenced for "crimes and excesses that he has committed and living immorally (*por tener mala vida*) and not having another profession than gambling and causing disputes and trouble among the Chinese of the Parian." In the list, we find a mention to Juan de Espinosa, described as "Black native to this city" (*negro criollo desta ciudad*) who was arrested for being "a vagabond and a gambler" (*por vagabundo y jugador*). Andrés Favián, described as *mulato*, received a punishment of four years at the galleys, because "he was caught in the port of Malolos, on account of being a gambler, *amancebado*, and he disturbed the native people."

Homosexuality was another "immoral" trait that the Spanish authorities associated frequently with the Manila Chinese. In the period covered by the list (1644-1649), sixteen people were condemned for committing the sin of sodomy, even though in some cases the mere fact of being two men alone in a room was reason enough to arrest them. The Christian Chinese Chapco and Juan Yaco were sent to the galleys for "being caught together in a chamber in a place where they could not be seen" (*por averlos cogidos juntos dentro de un aposento ni en parte donde no pueden ser vistos*). In another case, two sangleys were condemned for "being caught in a bed without breeches" (*por averlos cogidos juntos sin calzones*). Another entry expresses with more precision the law used to punish homosexuality: "It is forbidden to the 'beardless' to get together during the day or night in a chamber or in any part where they could not be seen or visited" (*Se prohive a los desbarbados el juntarse de dia o de noche en secreto dentro de un aposento ni en parte donde no puedan ser vistos ni visitados*).

The third most numerous category concerns the punishment of illicit commerce and fraud. The crimes included in this section go from shaving coins to smuggling. One of the most notable entries refers to the prohibition of unlicensed petty traders, who sold a variety of products and foodstuffs. The authorities targeted, in particular, the sale of *buyo y bonga* (betel nut) which contravened the exclusive deal that the city signed with *asentistas* (contractors), often of Chinese origin. On May 4th of 1646, twenty-seven men and seven women were sentenced to 200 lashings and six years of unpaid service, at the galleys in the case of men and in the royal hospital for women. The sentence indicates that it was forbidden for "any of the said vagabonds, free Blacks or any other people to go upriver to sell betel nut" (*ningún susodicho estrabagantes, negros libres ni otras personas bayan rio arriva a travesar el dicho buyo y bonga*). The social and ethnic background of the people sentenced is extraordinarily diverse. Among them, we find Mexican *criollos*, Black slaves, mulattoes, *indios* native of Quiapo and Santa Cruz, or sangleys from Santuo, Peta and Quitau. Lucía Pérez and Francisca Hernández are described as "free girls native of this city" (*mozas libres criollas desta ciudad*). Seventeen of them are described as slaves, and the name and ethnicity of their masters are also provided. The mention of Antonio Malabar and Domingo, *casta vengala*, are especially noteworthy. The registry indicates that they belonged to Ignacio and Catalina, respectively, both of them Japanese from Dilao. We find here the case of two people born in Malabar and Bengala, brought to Manila by Portuguese slave traders, that end up at the service of two Japanese persons. This source also indicates that petty trading was part of the activities carried out by domestic slaves in Manila, which might allow them to earn money in order to purchase their freedom.

The list of forzados also provides some information regarding the political events that marked the history of Manila during the 1640s. One of the most significant affairs was probably the end of the Iberian Union as a consequence of the Braganza restoration, which entailed the prohibition of trade between Macau and Manila after 1642. On 12 October of 1645, we find the case of Pedro Marino Arráez, who was condemned to death by hanging before his sentence was commuted to 10 years of service in the galleys and sequestration of his goods. His crime was "stealing a *champan* of His Majesty under his charge with some Portuguese and planning to incorporate with the Portuguese of Macau, rebels to the Crown" (*averse alsado con un champan de Su Magestad de su cargo con unos portugueses y aver puesto en execucion el irse a encorporar con los portugueses de Macan reveldes a la corona*). On the 9 May of 1646, the Portuguese Luis de Mato, Julio Barroso and Gaspar Mendes were sentenced to eight years of galley service for "wanting to incorporate with the rest of the Portuguese who have revolted against the Royal Crown" (*querer encorporarse con los demas portugueses que estan revelados a la real corona*).

| *Indio* | *Sangley* | Bengal and Malabar | Zambal | Spaniard | Black and mulatto | Mindanao and jolo | Portuguese and Dutch |
|---------|-----------|--------------------|--------|----------|-------------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| 223     | 606       | 46                 | 34     | 23       | 17                | 7                 | 6                    |

Table 2. Ethnic classification of the people condemned to the galleys.

| Place of residence | Gambling | Illicit trade and fraud | Violent crimes and theft | Treason, espionage and desertion | War captives | Sodomy | Carrying weapons |
|--------------------|----------|-------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------|--------|------------------|
| 178 (150+138)      | 81       | 52                      | 46                       | 42                               | 22           | 15     | 10               |

Table 3. Classification of the crimes committed by the *forzados*.[^49]

[^49]: The number of people included in this table does not correspong withe the total number of *forzados*, because in some cases the crime does not appear in the document.

6.5. Conclusion
===============
