# Problematic #

The Manila Galleon route across the Pacific, established in 1571, connected for the first time in a sustained and regular fashion the Eastern rim of Eurasia with Mexico and the Americas. In less than thirty years, Manila became a bustling town of up to 40,000 inhabitants, receiving migrants, traders and visitors from all over Southeast and East Asia. My dissertation focuses on the social and institutional arrangements that underpinned the emergence of Manila as a connecting hub in the expanding networks of global exchange that developed during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. (...) I will examine in detail the construction (both material and intellectual) of the municipal institutions and social practices that made Manila a logistic and organizational "point of assemblage" in global networks of trade, framing and articulating cross-cultural interactions in the early modern Philippines. I will argue that 

Most of the recent studies regarding the Spanish Philippines and the Manila Galleon have focused on the period of formation and expansion of the trans-Pacific conneciton (1571-1640), paying scant attention to the second half of the 17th century, which is portrayed as a period marked by economic depression and social turmoil. One of the main obejctives of my research is to complement and correct this relative imbalance. Furthermore, the investigation of a moment of crisis and rupture, such as the period around 1640, can allows us to define with more detail the essential characteristics of the object of research.  In this thesis, I develop a series of case-studies on individuals, specific events (such as the aftermath of a devastating earthquake that asolated Manila in 1645) and social groups (such as urban slaves), with a high density of source material and historical detail. As such, my research borrows from the recent trend of global micro-history, as well as histoire conectée, examining long-distance connections and exchanges from a close range and showing the confluence and mutual interdependence of external trade, military authority, policies regarding segregation, gender and sexuality, material culture and architecture; not as separate domains, but rather in movement, in a dynamic interrelation.

(What I am going to do)

## The Study of Global Interactions: Early Modern Manila as a Case-Study ##

In the recent historiography about global interaction during the early modern age, the history of Manila and the transpacific trade have achieved a prominent position. The city of Manila has become a sort of historiographical laboratory from which it is possible to analyse in detail the relation between global and local scales, constituting a privileged site for the investigation of conceptual and methodological issues that surround the construction of global networks in early modernity.

Some of the classic works in the history of early modern Manila, such as Schurz's The Manila Galleon, already mapped out many of topics that have attracted the attention of practitioners of global history in recent times; namely, the cross-cultural character of the Manila Galleon trade and the extent to which the urban landscape of Manila was defined by the transpacific silk-for-silver exchange. However, the recent upsurge in studies related the Manila Galleon can be traced to the series of articles published during the 1990s by Dennis O'Flynn and Arturo Giráldez. According to Flynn and Giraldez (1994), the development of the trans-Pacific link was a momentous event in world history, which we can reasonably take as a starting point for the age of global trade. In their words, "global trade emerged when all important populated continents began to exchange products continuously – both with each other directly and indirectly via other continents – and in values sufficient to generate crucial impacts on all the trading partners." The impact and widespread influence of Flynn and Giráldez's work put the Manila Galleon, and by extension the city of Manila, on the global map: instead of a peripheral and isolated region, as it was often described in the literature, these authors portray the Philippines as one of the most important maritime crossroads in the early modern world.

Flynn and Giráldez's main interest is the global integration of the silver market. They highlight the economic weight of China in the Early Modern world and the huge demand for silver that followed the collapse of its paper-based monetary system in the 14th century, arguing that without Chinese demand for silver the Spanish Empire would have never existed, as the American mines would have been far less profitable. During an insightful debate with economic historians Kevin O'Rourke and Jeffrey Williamson, Flynn and Giráldez expanded their analysis from a mainly economic and monetary interpretation to a broader, interdisciplinary understanding of global history that encompasses ecological, demographic and cultural phenomena. Whereas O'Rourke and Williamson denied the existence of processes of global integration before the nineteenth century, Flynn and Giráldez firmly placed the birth of globalization in the sixteenth century. Their case hinged not only on economic evidence, but also on the widespread ecological exchange between America, Asia, Africa and Europe. They also addressed, however briefly, the role of culture and religion in creating an embryonic 'global awareness.' But their main focus remained on macro historical trends, and they rarely dealt with the specific processes of cultural encounters and social practices at the micro level. In simpler terms, even though Flynn and Giráldez made Manila the central pivot of their historical revision of early modern globalization, the question of how the city came to be and how it evolved over the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was mostly passed by.

Of course, this is not so much a shortcoming of their work as a deliberate decision to frame their research in world historical terms, emphasizing planetary connections and broad patterns of historical evolution. The "bird's eye" approach used by Flynn and Giráldez is representative of a strand of historical analysis defined by a heavy focus on the long-term impact of economic trends, with the objective of finding the origins of contemporary globalization and explaining the roots of the Great Divergence between Europe and the rest of the world. The expansion of geographic and thematic horizons characteristic of global history has allowed authors like Kenneth Pommeranz to revisit old topics (such as the Industrial Revolution and the "Rise of the West") with new hypothesis and interpretations. However, writing history "at the global scale" has inherent limitations regarding the level of detail and archival research deployed in the historical analysis, and runs the risk of imposing anachronystic generalizations on the object of study, a trait which is sometimes evident in Flynn and Giráldez's treatment of Manila's urban character. Their viewpoint turns Manila into a passive mediator, to some extent indistinct and blurred, that simply facilitates commercial exchanges between different parts of the world. Therefore, the social and political functioning of the city dissapears, and with it the evolving cultural idioms and configurations developed in "contact zones"; that is, the concrete mechanisms that made cross-cultural interaction possible, which were both the result of newly-formed connections and the precondition for further linkages across the early modern world.

A corrective often prescribed to introduce texture into the sweeping narratives of global history is to pay closer attention to 'the reality on the ground.' In other words, in order to balance the focus on the vast and impersonal forces that drive economic, political or environmental evolution, the historian needs to provide a close-range description of the people and objects that are swept in the tides of large-scale historical trajectories. In the words of Tonio Andrade, "world history has tended toward the social science side of history. We've made great strides building powerful models of global historical structures and processes: global silver flows, strange parallels, divergences great and small. But we've tended to neglect the human dramas that make history come alive. I believe we should adopt microhistorical and biographical approaches to help populate our models and theories with real people, to write what one might call global microhistory.[^fn1]" Indeed, one of the most rewarding and fascinating endeavors that a historian can pursue is to rescue from the archive the stories of people who would otherwise be utterly forgotten, introducing an affective element into the dry, analytical style of macro-history. However, a biographical mode of writing than merely complements and adds colour to the big narratives of global history, without questioning its underlying assumptions, certainly falls short of the original ambitions of Italian micro-history, as Francesca Trivellato has forcefully argued. Trivellato distinguishes a narrative style of microhistory, associated with Anglo-Saxon academic trends, and an more analytical type of microhistory, represented by Giovanni Levi and Carlos Ginzburg, who defined their historical approach, not in terms of the size of the scale, but rather in terms of the methodology employed in the selection and reading of the sources, and what this analysis tells us about the implicit categories (the state, the city, the family) that form the basic units of macro-historical writing.

The crux of the problem lies not in deciding what is the most appropiate scale for the writing of history (a decision that depends wholly on the chosen object of study), or even in how to combine and articulate different scales in order give a more complete or innovative account of a certain topic. It is important to remember that scale (level, dimension, sphere) is not a intrinsic feature of reality, but rather a heuristic device. I would go even further and argue that, more often than not, the "game of scales" is not the result of a systematic and precise modelling operation, but rather a mode of presentation, a convenient and necessary device for communicating findings and arguments in an ongoing historiographical conversation. 

Perhaps we should rather question the idea that historical analysis operates at distinct scales (macro-micro, global-regional-local) defined by the breadth of their spatial framework. As Jacques Revel argued, there is no continuous link between levels or satisfactory way to translate 
 
Tolstoy
Connected vs Global
Trivellato[^fn2]

## Urban Linkages and the Cost of Connections

The history of the global interactions during the early modern age cannot be cogently understood without a close analysis of the social landscape of cities involved in the intensification of maritime and intercontinental exchange among world regions from the 15th to the 18th centuries. Sea routes between port-cities traced the contours of an urban network that by the end of the 16th century had encircled the world.
The movement of people, products and financial instruments through the Pacific cannot be dissociated from the upkeep of means of organized violence, given that the logistical apparatus necessary to build the huge transpacific galleons, as well as the construction and supply of the chain of Spanish fortresses in Southeast Asia, relied on to a large extent on coerced labour and fiscal exaction. Trade financed war and military tools protected commercial routes, but both were built upon a complex system for the mobilisation of labour.
In order to understand the formation of cross-cultural interactions, it is necessary to take into account not only the commercial aspects of long-distance routes, but also the costs generated by the construction, supply and protection of these lanes of interaction. The exchange system built around the Manila Galleons not only generated high profits, it also produced great material and human costs that were shared unequally based on specific relations of power

Logistics, empire and social landscapes
Logistics, and the technological werewithal associated with moving cargo and creating a "war machine", were the backbone of empire. The imperative of logistics framed the fiscal system, which in turn, assigned a hierarchical and spatial "proper place" to the people under the Monarchy's sovereignty. 

What does it mean to build a colony?
What about the logistic and military structures that supported trade? These provided the protection necessary to carry out trade ---> Logistics, and the technological werewithal associated with moving cargo and creating a "war machine", were the backbone of empire. The imperative of logistics framed the fiscal system, which in turn, assigned a hierarchical and spatial "proper place" to the people under the Monarchy's sovereignty.

## Mobility and Governance in the Frontier ##

Like other crucial nodes in maritime networks, Manila was located at the frontier of several powerful polities and large empires. The colonial authorities' concern regarding the unimpeded movement of traders and other go-betweens from place to place was a primary element shaping and influencing the legal and political arrangements that framed Manila as "contact zone." In this paper, I will not dispute Flynn and Giraldez's thesis, but rather try to complement it by shifting the focus from the macro-mobility of large-scale, long durèe processes of intercontinental exchange to the management of ethnic segregation and micro-mobility within the urban setting of Manila.

[^fn1]: Tonio Andrade, "A Chinese Farmer, Two African Boys, and a Warlord: Toward a Global Microhistory," Journal of World History 21, no. 4 (2010): 573–91. P. 2

[^fn2]: "The idea that a micro- and biographical scale can best portray the entanglement of cultural traditions produced by the growing contacts and clashes between different societies that followed the sixteenth century European geographical expansion." Francesca Trivellato, "Is There a Future for Italian Microhistory in the Age of Global History?," California Italian Studies 2, no. 1 (2011).  P. 1